<?xml version="1.0" encoding="iso-8859-1" ?>

<!--
The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Blood of the Conquerors
by Harvey Fergusson



This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license



Title: The Blood of the Conquerors

Author: Harvey Fergusson

Release Date: March 2007 [Ebook #20888]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1
-->

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd">

<TEI.2 lang="en">

<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>The Blood of the Conquerors</title>
      <author><name reg="Fergusson, Harvey">Harvey Fergusson</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date value="2007-03-23">March 23, 2007</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">20888</idno>
      <idno type="DPid">projectID454122582ab3c</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        <title>The Blood of the Conquerors</title>
        <author>Harvey Fergusson</author>
        <imprint>
          <publisher>Alfred A. Knopf</publisher>
          <pubPlace>New York</pubPlace>
          <date>1921</date>
        </imprint>
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
    <projectDesc>
      <p>Produced by Roland Schlenker
      and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
      &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/c&gt;</p>
      <p>Page-images available at
      &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/projects/projectID454122582ab3c/&gt;</p>
    </projectDesc>
    <editorialDecl>
      <p>The Proofreading and Formatting Guidelines Version 1.9.c,
      generated January 1, 2006 at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt; were
      used to transcribe this text.</p>
      <p>Corrections were made when it was obvious a mistake was made
      in the original text. An errata is supplied to locate these
      corrections.</p>
      <p>Quotation marks have been changed to TEI
      encoding &lt;q&gt; and &lt;/q&gt;.</p>
      <p>Hyphenated words at the end of a line or at the end of a page
      have had their hyphens removed. The second part of the hyphenated
      word has been moved to the previous line or page. No information
      has been kept as to the location of these changes.</p>
      <p>Characters not in ISO-8859-1 have been changed to TEI
      entities.</p>
      <p>The original book had no table of contents. A table of contents
      was made for this electronic edition.</p>
    </editorialDecl>
    <classDecl>
      <taxonomy id="lc">
        <bibl>
          <title>Library of Congress Classification</title>
        </bibl>
      </taxonomy>
    </classDecl>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en">English</language>
    </langUsage>
    <textClass>
      <classCode scheme="lc">PS</classCode>
      <classCode scheme="lc">PZ</classCode>
      <keywords scheme="lc">
        <list>
          <item>American literature --
            By period -- 20th century</item>
          <item>American literature --
            Individual authors -- 1900-1960</item>
          <item>Fiction and juvenile belles lettres --
            Fiction in English</item>
        </list>
      </keywords>
    </textClass>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2007-03-23">Febraury 23, 2007</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>Roland Schlenker and<lb/></name>
        <name>Online Distributed Proofreading Team</name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg Edition</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<text lang="en">

<front>
  <div>
    <divGen type="pgheader"/>
  </div>

  <div>
    <divGen type="encodingDesc"/>
  </div>

  <titlePage rend="page-break-before: right; text-align: center">
  <pb n="3"/><anchor id="Pg3"/>
    <docTitle>
      <titlePart type="main">
        <hi rend="font-size: 175%">The Blood of the Conquerors</hi><lb/>
      </titlePart>
    </docTitle>
    <byline>
      <hi rend="font-size: 125%">by</hi><lb/>
      <docAuthor>
        <hi rend="font-size: 150%">Harvey Fergusson</hi><lb/>
        <lb/>
      </docAuthor>
    </byline>
    <docImprint>
      <hi rend="font-size: 125%">New York</hi><lb/>
      <hi rend="font-size: 150%">Alfred &middot; A &middot; Knopf</hi><lb/>
    </docImprint>
    <docDate>
      <hi rend="font-size: 100%">1921</hi><lb/>
    </docDate>
  </titlePage>

  <div rend="page-break-before: always; text-align: center" type="verso">
    <pb n="4"/><anchor id="Pg4"/>
    <p rend="page-float: 't'">
    <hi rend="font-size: 75%">COPYRIGHT, 1921, BY</hi><lb/>
    <hi rend="font-size: 75%">ALFRED A. KNOPF, <hi
    rend="font-variant: small-caps">Inc</hi>.</hi></p>

    <p rend="page-float: 'b'">
    <hi rend="font-size: 50%">PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA</hi></p>
  </div>

  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <index index="pdf"/>
    <head rend="text-align: center">Contents</head>
    <divGen type="toc"/>
  </div>
</front>

<body>

<!-- <pb n="1"/><anchor id="Pg1"/>
[Extra Page]

<hi rend="font-style: italic">The Blood of
the Conquerors</hi> -->

<!-- <pb n="2"/><anchor id="Pg2"/>
[Extra Page]

<hi rend="font-style: italic">NEW BORZOI NOVELS
FALL, 1921</hi>

/*
<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Pan</hi>
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">Knut Hamsun</hi>

<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Dreamers</hi>
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">Knut Hamsun</hi>

<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">The Tortoise</hi>
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">Mary Borden</hi>

<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">The China Shop</hi>
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">G. B. Stern</hi>

<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">The Briary-Bush</hi>
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">Floyd Dell</hi>

<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Deadlock</hi>
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">Dorothy Richardson</hi>

<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">The Other Magic</hi>
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">E. L. Grant-Watson</hi>

<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">White Shoulders</hi>
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">George Kibbe Turner</hi>

<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">The Charmed Circle</hi>
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">Edward Alden Jewell</hi>

<hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">The Blood of the Conquerors</hi>
  <hi rend="font-style: italic">Harvey Furgusson[**corr: Fergusson]</hi>
*/ -->

<!-- <pb n="3"/><anchor id="Pg3"/>
[Title Page]

<hi rend="font-style: italic">The Blood of the Conquerors</hi>

<hi rend="font-style: italic">by</hi>

<hi rend="font-style: italic">Harvey Fergusson</hi>

<hi rend="font-style: italic">New York</hi>

<hi rend="font-style: italic">Alfred � A � Knopf</hi>

<hi rend="font-style: italic">1921</hi> -->

<!-- <pb n="4"/><anchor id="Pg4"/>
[Extra Page]

COPYRIGHT, 1921, BY
ALFRED A. KNOPF, <hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Inc</hi>.

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA -->

<!-- <pb n="5"/><anchor id="Pg5"/>
[Extra Page]

<hi rend="font-style: italic">The Blood of
the Conquerors</hi> -->

<!-- <pb n="6"/><anchor id="Pg6"/>
[Blank Page] -->

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC01" type="chapter">
<pb n="7"/><anchor id="Pg7"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER I</hi>
</head>

<p>Whenever Ramon Delcasar boarded a railroad
train he indulged a habit, not uncommon among
men, of choosing from the women passengers the
one whose appearance most pleased him to be the
object of his attention during the journey. If
the woman were reserved or well-chaperoned, or
if she obviously belonged to another man, this attention
might amount to no more than an occasional
discreet glance in her direction. He never
tried to make her acquaintance unless her eyes and
mouth unmistakably invited him to do so.</p>

<p>This conservatism on his part was not due to an
innate lack of self-confidence. Whenever he felt
sure of his social footing, his attitude toward
women was bold and assured. But his social footing
was a peculiarly uncertain thing for the reason
that he was a Mexican. This meant that he
faced in every social contact the possibility of a
more or less covert prejudice against his blood,
and that he faced it with an unduly proud and sensitive
spirit concealed beneath a manner of aristocratic
indifference. In the little southwestern
town where he had lived all his life, except the
<pb n="8"/><anchor id="Pg8"/>
last three years, his social position was ostensibly
of the highest. He was spoken of as belonging
to an old and prominent family. Yet he knew of
mothers who carefully guarded their daughters
from the peril of falling in love with him, and most
of his boyhood fights had started when some one
called him a <q>damned Mexican</q> or a <q>greaser.</q></p>

<p>Except to an experienced eye there was little in
his appearance or in his manner to suggest his
race. His swarthy complexion indicated perhaps
a touch of the Moorish blood in his Spanish ancestry,
but he was no darker than are many Americans
bearing Anglo-Saxon names, and his eyes
were grey. His features were aquiline and
pleasing, and he had in a high degree that bearing,
at once proud and unself-conscious, which is called
aristocratic. He spoke English with a very slight
Spanish accent.</p>

<p>When he had gone away to a Catholic law
school in St. Louis, confident of his speech and
manner and appearance, he had believed that he
was leaving prejudice behind him; but in this he
had been disappointed. The raw spots in his consciousness,
if a little less irritated at the college,
were by no means healed. Some persons, it is
true, seemed to think nothing of his race one way
or the other; to some, mostly women, it gave him
an added interest; but in the long run it worked
against him. It kept him out of a fraternity, and
<pb n="9"/><anchor id="Pg9"/>
it made his career in football slow and hard.</p>

<p>When he finally won the coveted position of
quarterback, in spite of team politics, he made a
reputation by the merciless fashion in which he
drove his eleven, and by the fury of his own playing.</p>

<p>The same bitter emulative spirit which had impelled
him in football drove him to success in his
study of the law. Books held no appeal for him,
and he had no definite ambitions, but he had a
good head and a great desire to show the gringos
what he could do. So he had graduated high in
his class, thrown his diploma into the bottom of
his trunk, and departed from his alma mater without
regret.</p>

<p>The limited train upon which he took passage
for home afforded specially good opportunity for
his habit of mental philandering. The passengers
were continually going up and down between the
dining car at one end of the train and the observation
car at the other, so that all of the women
daily passed in review. They were an unusually
attractive lot, for most of the passengers were
wealthy easterners on their way to California.
Ramon had never before seen together so many
women of the kind that devotes time and money
and good taste to the business of creating charm.
Perfectly gowned and groomed, delicately scented,
they filled him with desire and with envy for the
<pb n="10"/><anchor id="Pg10"/>
men who owned them. There were two newly
married couples among the passengers, and several
intense flirtations were under way before the
train reached Kansas City. Ramon felt as though
he were a spectator at some delightful carnival.
He was lonely and restless, yet fascinated.</p>

<p>For no opportunity of becoming other than a
spectator had come to him. He had chosen without
difficulty the girl whom he preferred, but had
only dared to admire her from afar. She was a
little blonde person, not more than twenty, with
angelic grey eyes, hair of the colour of ripe wheat
and a complexion of perfect pink and white. The
number of different costumes which she managed
to don in two days filled him with amazement and
gave her person an ever-varying charm and interest.
She appeared always accompanied by a very
placid-looking and portly woman, who was evidently
her mother, and a tall, cadaverous sick
man, whose indifferent and pettish attitude toward
her seemed to indicate that he was either a brother
or an uncle, for Ramon felt sure that she was not
married. She acquired no male attendants, but
sat most of the time very properly, if a little restlessly,
with her two companions. Once or twice
Ramon felt her look upon him, but she always
turned it away when he glanced at her.</p>

<p>Whether because she was really beautiful in her
own petite way, or because she seemed so unattainable,
<pb n="11"/><anchor id="Pg11"/>
or because her small blonde daintiness had
a peculiar appeal for him, Ramon soon reached a
state of conviction that she interested him more
than any other girl he had ever seen. He discreetly
followed her about the train, watching for
the opportunity that never came, and consoling
himself with the fact that no one else seemed
more fortunate in winning her favour than he.
The only strange male who attained to the privilege
of addressing her was a long-winded and elderly
gentleman of the British perpetual-travelling
type, at least one representative of which is found
on every transcontinental train, and it was plain
enough that he bored the girl.</p>

<p>Ramon took no interest in landscapes generally,
but when he awoke on the last morning of his
journey and found himself once more in the wide
and desolate country of his birth, he was so deeply
stirred and interested that he forgot all about
the girl. Devotion to one particular bit of soil is
a Mexican characteristic, and in Ramon it was
highly developed because he had spent so much
of his life close to the earth. Every summer of
his boyhood he had been sent to one of the sheep
ranches which belonged to the various branches
of his numerous family. Each of these ranches
was merely a headquarters where the sheep were
annually dipped and sheared and from which the
herds set out on their long wanderings across the
<pb n="12"/><anchor id="Pg12"/>
open range. Often Ramon had followed them&mdash;across
the deserts where the heat shimmered and
the yellow dust hung like a great pale plume over
the rippling backs of the herd, and up to the summer
range in the mountains where they fed above
the clouds in lush green pastures crowned with
spires of rock and snow. He had shared the
beans and mutton and black coffee of the herders
and had gone to sleep on a pile of peltries to the
evensong of the coyotes that hung on the flanks
of the herd. Hunting, fishing, wandering, he had
lived like a savage and found the life good.</p>

<p>It was this life of primitive freedom that he had
longed for in his exile. He had thought little of
his family and less of his native town, but a nostalgia
for open spaces and free wanderings had
been always with him. He had come to hate the
city with its hard walled-in ways and its dirty air,
and also the eastern country-side with its little
green prettiness surrounded by fences. He longed
for a land where one can see for fifty miles, and not
a man or a house. He thought that alkaline dust
on his lips would taste sweet.</p>

<p>Now he saw again the scorched tawny levels,
the red hills dotted with little gnarled
<hi rend="font-style: italic">pinon</hi> trees,
the purple mystery of distant mountains. A great
friendly warmth filled his body, and his breath
came a little quickly with eagerness. When he
<pb n="13"/><anchor id="Pg13"/>
saw a group of Mexicans jogging along the road
on their scrawny mounts he wanted to call out to them:
<q><hi rend="font-style: italic">Como lo va, amigos?</hi></q>
He would have
liked to salute this whole country, which was his
country, and to tell it how glad he was to see it
again. It was the one thing in the world that he
loved, and the only thing that had ever given him
pleasure without tincture of bitterness.</p>

<p>He heard two men in the seat behind him talking.</p>

<p><q>Did you ever see anything so desolate?</q> one
asked.</p>

<p><q>I wouldn&rsquo;t live in this country if they gave it
to me,</q> said the other.</p>

<p>Ramon turned and looked at them. They were
solid, important-looking men, and having visited
upon the country their impressive disapproval,
they opened newspapers and shut it away from
their sight. Dull fools, thought Ramon, who do
not know God&rsquo;s country when they see it.</p>

<p>And then he continued to look right over their
heads and their newspapers, for tripping down
the aisle all by herself at last, came the girl of
his fruitless choice. His eyes, deep with dreams,
met hers. She smiled upon him, radiantly,
blushed a little, and hurried on through the car.</p>

<p>He sat looking after her with a foolish grin on
his face. He was pleased and shaken. So she
<pb n="14"/><anchor id="Pg14"/>
had noticed him after all. She had been waiting
for a chance, as well as he. And now that it had
come, he was getting off the train in an hour. It
was useless to follow her.&hellip; He turned to the
window again.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC02" type="chapter">
<pb n="15"/><anchor id="Pg15"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER II</hi>
</head>

<p>Usually in each generation of a large and long-established
family there is some one individual
who stands out from the rest as a leader and as
the most perfect embodiment of the family traditions
and characteristics. This was especially
true of the Delcasar family. It was established
in this country in the year 1790 by Don Eusabio
Maria Delcasar y Morales, an officer in the army
of the King of Spain, who distinguished himself in
the conquest of New Mexico, and especially in
certain campaigns against the Navajos. As was
customary at that time, the King rewarded his
faithful soldier with a grant of land in the new
province. This Delcasar estate lay in the Rio
Grande Valley and the surrounding
<hi rend="font-style: italic">mesa</hi> lands.
By the provisions of the King&rsquo;s grant, its dimensions
were each the distance that Don Delcasar
could ride in a day. The Don chose good horses
and did not spare them, so that he secured to his
family more than a thousand square miles of land
with a strip of rich valley through the middle and
a wilderness of desert and mountain on either side.
Much of this principality was never seen by Don
Eusabio, and even the four sons who divided the
<pb n="16"/><anchor id="Pg16"/>
estate upon his death had each more land than he
could well use.</p>

<p>The outstanding figure of this second generation
was Don Solomon Delcasar, who was noted for
the magnificence of his establishment, and for his
autocratic spirit.</p>

<p>No Borgia or Bourbon ever ruled more absolutely
over his own domain than did Don Solomon
over the hundreds of square miles which made up
his estate. He owned not only lands and herds
but also men and women. The
<hi rend="font-style: italic">peones</hi> who
worked his lands were his possessions as much as
were his horses. He had them beaten when they
offended him and their daughters were his for the
taking. He could not sell them, but this restriction
did not apply to the Navajo and Apache
slaves whom he captured in war. These were his
to be sold or retained for his own use as he preferred.
Adult Indians were seldom taken prisoner,
as they were
<corr sic="untamable"><anchor id="E1"/>
<ref target="e1">untameable</ref></corr>,
but boys and girls
below the age of fifteen were always taken alive,
when possible, and were valued at five hundred
<hi rend="font-style: italic">pesos</hi> each.
Don Solomon usually sold the boys, as he had plenty of
<hi rend="font-style: italic">peones</hi>,
but he never sold a comely Indian girl.</p>

<p>The Don was a man of proud and irascible
temper, but kindly when not crossed. He had
been known to kill a
<hi rend="font-style: italic">peon</hi>
in a fit of anger, and then
<pb n="17"/><anchor id="Pg17"/>
afterward to bestow all sorts of benefits upon the
man&rsquo;s wife and children.</p>

<p>The life of his home, like that of all the other
Mexican gentlemen in his time, was an easy and
pleasant one. He owned a great
<hi rend="font-style: italic">adobe</hi> house,
built about a square courtyard like a fort, and
shaded pleasantly by cottonwood trees. There he
dwelt with his numerous family, his
<hi rend="font-style: italic">peones</hi> and his
slaves. In the spring and summer every one
worked in the fields, though not too hard. In the
fall the men went east to the great plains to kill a
supply of buffalo meat for the winter, and often
after the hunt they travelled south into Sonora
and Chihuahua to trade mustangs and buffalo
hides for woven goods and luxuries.</p>

<p>There was a pleasant social life among the
aristocrats of dances and visits. Marriages,
funerals and christenings were occasions of great
ceremony and social importance. Indeed everything
done by the Dons was characterized by
much formality and ceremony, the custom of which
had been brought over from Spain. But they
were no longer really in touch with Spanish civilization.
They never went back to the mother
country. They had no books save the Bible and
a few other religious works, and many of them
never learned to read these. Their lives were
made up of fighting, with the Indians and also
<pb n="18"/><anchor id="Pg18"/>
among themselves, for there were many feuds;
of hunting and primitive trade; and of venery
upon a generous and patriarchal scale. They
were Spanish gentlemen by descent, all for honour
and tradition and sentiment; but by circumstance
they were barbarian lords, and their lives were
full of lust and blood.</p>

<p>Circumstance somewhat modified the vaunted
purity of their Spanish blood, too. The Indian
slave girls who lived in their houses bore the
children of their sons, and some of these half-bred
and quarter-bred children were eventually accepted by the
<hi rend="font-style: italic">gente de razon</hi>,
as the aristocrats
called themselves. In this way a strain of Navajo
blood got into the Delcasar family, and doubtless
did much good, as all of the Spanish stock was
weakened by much marrying of cousins.</p>

<p>Dona Ameliana Delcasar, a sister of Don Solomon,
was responsible for another alien infusion
which ultimately percolated all through the family,
and has been thought by some to be responsible
for the unusual mental ability of certain Delcasars.
Dona Ameliana, a beautiful but somewhat
unruly girl, went into a convent in Durango,
Mexico, at the age of fifteen. At the age of
eighteen she eloped with a French priest named
Raubien, who was a man of unusual intellect and
a poet. The errant couple came to New Mexico
and took up lands. They were excommunicated,
<pb n="19"/><anchor id="Pg19"/>
of course, and both of them were buried in unconsecrated
ground; but despite their spiritual
handicaps they raised a family of eleven comely
daughters, all of whom married well, several of
them into the Delcasar family. Thus some of the
Delcasars who boasted of their pure Castilian
blood were really of a mongrel breed, comprising
along with the many strains that have mingled
in Spain, those of Navajo and French.</p>

<p>Don Solomon Delcasar played a brilliant part
in the military activities which marked the winning
of Mexican Independence from Spain in the
eighteen-twenties, and also in the incessant Indian
wars. He was a fighter by necessity, but also by
choice. They shed blood with grace and nonchalance
in those days, and the Delcasars were
always known as dangerous men.</p>

<p>The most curious thing about this r�gime of the
old-time Dons was the way in which it persisted.
It received its first serious blow in 1845 when the
military forces of the United States took possession
of New Mexico. Don Jesus Christo Delcasar,
who was then the richest and most powerful
of the family, was suspected of being a party to
the conspiracy which brought about the Taos massacre&mdash;the
last organized resistance made to the
gringo domination. At this time some of the
Delcasars went to Old Mexico to live, as did a
good many others among the Dons, feeling that
<pb n="20"/><anchor id="Pg20"/>
the old ways of life in New Mexico were sure to
change, and having the Spanish aversion to any
departure from tradition. But their fears were
not realized, and life went on as before. In 1865 the
<hi rend="font-style: italic">peones</hi>
and Indian slaves were formally set
free, but all of them immediately went deeply in
debt to their former masters and thus retained
in effect the same status as before. So it happened
that in the seventies, when New York was
growing into a metropolis, and the factory system
was fastening itself upon New England, and the
middle west was getting fat and populous and
tame, life in the Southwest remained much as it
had been a century before.</p>

<p>Laws and governments were powerless there
to change ways of life, as they have always been,
but two parallel bars of steel reaching across the
prairies brought change with them, and it was
great and sudden. The railroad reached the Rio
Grande Valley early in the eighties, and it smashed
the colourful barbaric pattern of the old life as the
ruthless fist of an infidel might smash a stained
glass window. The metropolis of the northern
valley in those days was a sleepy little
<hi rend="font-style: italic">adobe</hi> town
of a few hundred people, reclining about its dusty
<hi rend="font-style: italic">plaza</hi>
near the river. The railroad, scorning to
notice it, passed a mile away. Forthwith a new
town began growing up between, the old one and
the railroad. And this new town was such a town
<pb n="21"/><anchor id="Pg21"/>
as had never before been seen in all the Southwest.
It was built of wood and only half painted. It was
ugly, noisy and raw. It was populated largely
by real estate agents, lawyers, politicians and barkeepers.
It cared little for joy, leisure, beauty or
tradition. Its God was money and its occupation
was business.</p>

<p>This thing called business was utterly strange
to the Delcasars and to all of the other Dons.
They were men of the saddle, fighting men, and
traders only in a primitive way. Business seemed
to them a conspiracy to take their lands and their
goods away from them, and a remarkably successful
conspiracy. Debt and mortgage and speculation
were the names of its weapons. Some of the
Dons, including many of the Delcasars, who were
now a very numerous family, owning each a comfortable
homestead but no more, sold out and went
to Old Mexico. Many who stayed lost all they
had in a few years, and degenerated into petty
politicians or small storekeepers. Some clung to
a bit of land and went on farming, making always
less and less money, sinking into poverty and insignificance,
until some of them were no better off
than the men who had once been their
<hi rend="font-style: italic">peones</hi>.</p>

<p>Diego Delcasar and Felipe Delcasar, brothers,
were two who owned houses in the Old Town and
farms nearby, who stayed in the country and held
their own for a time and after a fashion. Diego
<pb n="22"/><anchor id="Pg22"/>
Delcasar was far the more able of the two, and a
true scion of his family. He caught onto the
gringo methods to a certain extent. He divided
some farm land on the edge of town into lots and
sold them for a good price. With the money he
bought a great area of mountain land in the northern
part of the state, where he raised sheep and
ruled with an iron hand, much as his forbears had
ruled in the valley. He also went into politics,
learned to make a good stump speech and got
himself elected to the highly congenial position of
sheriff. In this place he made a great reputation
for fearlessness and for the ruthless and skilful
use of a gun. He once kicked down the locked
door of a saloon and arrested ten armed gamblers,
who had threatened to kill him. He was known
and feared all over the territory and was a tyrant
in his own section of it. When a gringo prospector
ventured to dispute with him the ownership
of a certain mine, the gringo was found dead in
the bottom of the shaft. It was reported that
he had fallen in and broken his neck and no one
dared to look at the bullet hole in his back.</p>

<p>Don Diego&rsquo;s wife died without leaving him any
children, but he had numerous children none-the-less.
It was said that one could follow his wanderings
about the territory by the sporadic occurrence
of the unmistakable Delcasar nose among
the younger inhabitants. All of his sons and
<pb n="23"/><anchor id="Pg23"/>
daughters by the left hand he treated with notable
generosity. He was a sort of hero to the native
people&mdash;a great fighter, a great lover&mdash;and
songs about his adventures were
<corr sic="comoposed"><anchor id="E2"/>
<ref target="e2">composed</ref></corr>
and sung around the fires in sheep camps and by gangs
of trackworkers.</p>

<p>Don Diego, in a word, was a true Delcasar and
a great man. Had he used his opportunities
wisely he might have been a millionaire. But at
the age of sixty he owned little besides his house
and his wild mountain lands. He drank a good
deal and played poker almost every night. Once
he had been a famous winner, but in these later
years he generally lost. He also formed a partnership
with a real estate broker named MacDougall,
for the development of his wild lands,
and it was predicted by some that the leading
development would be an ultimate transfer of
title to Mr. MacDougall, who was known to be
lending the Don money and taking land as security.</p>

<p>Don Felipe&rsquo;s career was far less spectacular
than that of his brother. He owned more than
Don Diego to start with, and he spent his life
slowly losing it, so that when he died he left
nothing but a house in Old Town and a single
small sheep ranch, which afforded his widow,
two daughters and one son a scant living.</p>

<p>This son, Ramon Delcasar, was the hope of
<pb n="24"/><anchor id="Pg24"/>
the family. He would inherit the estate of Don
Diego, if the old Don died before spending it
all, which it did not seem likely that he would
do. But Ramon early demonstrated that he
had a more important heritage in the sharp intelligence,
and the proud, plucky and truculent
spirit which had characterized the best of the
Delcasars throughout the family history.</p>

<p>As there was no considerable family estate for
him to settle upon, he was sent to law school at
the age of twenty, and returned three years later
to take up the practice of his profession in his
native town. Thus he was the first of the Delcasars
to face life with his bare hands. And he
was also the last of them in a sense, to face the
gringos. All the others of his name, save the
senile Don, had either died, departed or sunk
from sight into the mass of the peasantry.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC03" type="chapter">
<pb n="25"/><anchor id="Pg25"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER III</hi>
</head>

<p>The year that Ramon returned to his native
town the annual fair, which took place at the
fair-grounds in Old Town, was an especially gorgeous
and throngful event, rich in spectacle and
incident. A steer was roped and hog-tied in
record time by Clay MacGarnigal of Lincoln
County. A seven-mile relay race was won by a
buck named Slonny Begay. In the bronco busting
contest two men were injured to the huge enjoyment
of the crowd. The twenty-seventh cavalry
from Fort Bliss performed a sham battle.
The home team beat several other teams. Enormous
apples raised by irrigation in the Pecos Valley
attracted much attention, and a hungry Mexican
absconded with a prize Buff Orpington rooster.</p>

<p>Twice a day the single narrow street which
connected the neat brick and frame respectability
of New Town with the picturesque <hi
rend="font-style: italic">adobe</hi> squalor
of Old Town was filled by a curiously varied
crowd. The tourist from the East, distinguished
by his camera and his unnecessary umbrella,
jostled the Pueblo squaw from Isleta,
with her latest-born slung over her shoulder in
a fold of red blanket. Mexican families from
<pb n="26"/><anchor id="Pg26"/>
the country marched in single file, the men first,
then the women enveloped in huge black shawls,
carrying babies and leading older children by the
hand. Cowboys, Indians and soldiers raced
their horses through the swarming street with
reckless skill. Automobiles honked and fretted.
The street cars, bulging humanity at every door
and window, strove in vain to relieve the situation.
Several children and numerous pigs and
chickens were run over. From the unpaved
street to the cloudless sky rose a vast cloud of
dust, such as only a rainless country made of
sand can produce. Dust was in every one&rsquo;s eyes
and mouth and upon every one&rsquo;s clothing. It was
the unofficial badge of the gathering. It turned
the green of the cottonwood trees to grey, and
lay in wait for unsuspecting teeth between the
halves of hamburger sandwiches sold at corner
booths.</p>

<p>Ramon, who had obtained a pass to the grounds
through the influence of his uncle, went to the fair
every day, although he was not really pleased
with it. He was assured by every one that it was
the greatest fair ever held in the southwest, but
to him it seemed smaller, dustier and less exciting
than the fairs he had attended in his boyhood.</p>

<p>This impression harmonized with a general
feeling of discontent which had possessed him
since his return. He had obtained a position in
<pb n="27"/><anchor id="Pg27"/>
the office of a lawyer at fifty dollars a month,
and spent the greater part of each day making
out briefs and borrowing books for his employer
from other lawyers. It seemed to him a petty
and futile occupation, and the way to anything
better was long and obscure. The town was
full of other young lawyers who were doing the
same things and doing them with a better grace
than he. They were impelled by a great desire to
make money. He, too, would have liked a great
deal of money, but he had no taste for piling it
up dollar by dollar. The only thing that cheered
him was the prospect of inheriting his uncle&rsquo;s
wealth, and that was an uncertain prospect. Don
Diego seemed to be doing what he could to get
rid of his property before he died.</p>

<p>Local society did not please Ramon either.
The girls of the gringo families were not nearly
as pretty, for the most part, as the ones he had
seen in the East. The dryness and the scorching
sun had a bad effect on their complexions. The
girls of his own race did not much interest him;
his liking was for blondes. And besides, girls
were relatively scarce in the West because of the
great number of men who came from the East.
Competition for their favours was keen, and he
could not compete successfully because he had so
little money.</p>

<p>The fair held but one new experience for him,
<pb n="28"/><anchor id="Pg28"/>
and that was the Montezuma ball. This took
place on the evening of the last day, and was an
exclusive invitation event, designed to give
elegance to the fair by bringing together
prominent persons from all parts of the state.
Ramon had never attended a Montezuma ball,
as he had been considered a mere boy before
his departure for college and had not owned a
dress suit. But this lack had now been supplied,
and he had obtained an invitation through the
Governor of the State, who happened to be a
Mexican.</p>

<p>He went to the ball with his mother and his eldest
sister in a carriage which had been among the
family possessions for about a quarter of a century.
It had once been a fine equipage, and had
been drawn by a spirited team in the days before
Felipe Delcasar lost all his money, but now it had
a look of decay, and the team consisted of a couple
of rough coated, low-headed brutes, one of which
was noticeably smaller than the other. The
coachman was a ragged native who did odd jobs
about the Delcasar house.</p>

<p>The Montezuma ball took place in the new
Eldorado Hotel which had recently been built
by the railroad company for the entertainment of
its transcontinental passengers. It was not a
beautiful building, but it was an apt expression of
the town&rsquo;s personality. Designed in the ancient
<pb n="29"/><anchor id="Pg29"/>
style of the early Spanish missions, long, low
and sprawling, with deep verandahs, odd little
towers and arched gateways it was made of cement
and its service and prices were of the Manhattan
school. A little group of Pueblo Indians, lonesomely
picturesque in buck-skin and red blankets,
with silver and turquoise rings and bracelets,
were always seated before its doors, trying to sell
fruit and pottery to well-tailored tourists. It
had a museum of Southwestern antiquities and
curios, where a Navajo squaw sulkily wove
blankets on a handloom for the edification of the
guilded stranger from the East. On the platform
in front of it, perspiring Mexicans smashed baggage
and performed the other hard labour of a
modern terminal.</p>

<p>Thus the Eldorado Hotel was rich in that contrast
between the old and the new which everywhere
characterized the town. Generally speaking,
the old was on exhibition or at work, while
the new was at leisure or in charge.</p>

<p>When the Delcasar carriage reached the hotel,
it had to take its place in a long line of crawling
vehicles, most of which were motor cars. Ramon
felt acutely humiliated to arrive at the ball in a
decrepit-looking rig when nearly every one else
came in an automobile. He hoped that no one
would notice them. But the smaller of the two
horses, which had spent most of his life in the
<pb n="30"/><anchor id="Pg30"/>
country, became frightened, reared, plunged, and
finally backed the rig into one of the cars, smashing
a headlight, blocking traffic, and making the
Delcasars a target for searchlights and oaths.
The Dona Delcasar, a ponderous and swarthy
woman in voluminous black silk, became excited
and stood up in the carriage, shouting shrill and
useless directions to the coachman in Spanish.
People began to laugh. Ramon roughly seized
his mother by the arm and dragged her down.
He was trembling with rage and embarassment.</p>

<p>It was an immense relief to him when he had
deposited the two women on chairs and was able
to wander away by himself. He took up his
position in a doorway and watched the opening of
the ball with a cold and disapproving eye. The
beginning was stiff, for many of those present were
unknown to each other and had little in common.
Most of them were <q>Americans,</q> Jews and
Mexicans. The men were all a good deal alike
in their dress suits, but the women displayed an
astonishing variety. There were tall gawky
blonde wives of prominent cattlemen; little natty
black-eyed Jewesses, best dressed of all; swarthy
Mexican mothers of politically important families,
resplendent in black silk and diamonds; and
pretty dark Mexican girls of the younger generation,
who did not look at all like the se�oritas
<pb n="31"/><anchor id="Pg31"/>
of romance, but talked, dressed and flirted in a
thoroughly American manner.</p>

<p>The affair finally got under way in the form of
a grand march, which toured the hall a couple of
times and disintegrated into waltzing couples.
Ramon watched this proceeding and several other
dances without feeling any desire to take part.
He was in a state of grand and gloomy discontent,
which was not wholly unpleasant, as is often the
case with youthful glooms. He even permitted
himself to smile at some of the capers cut by
prominent citizens. But presently his gaze settled
upon one couple with a real sense of resentment
and uneasiness. The couple consisted of his
uncle, Diego Delcasar, and the wife of James
MacDougall, the lawyer and real estate operator
with whom the Don had formed a partnership,
and whom Ramon believed to be systematically
fleecing the old man.</p>

<p>Don Diego was a big, paunchy Mexican with
a smooth brown face, strikingly set off by fierce
white whiskers. His partner was a tall, tight-lipped,
angular woman, who danced painfully,
but with determination. The two had nothing to
say to each other, but both of them smiled
resolutely, and the Don visibly perspired under
the effort of steering his inflexible friend.</p>

<p>Although he did not formulate the idea, this
<pb n="32"/><anchor id="Pg32"/>
couple was to Ramon a symbol of the disgust with
which the life of his native town inspired him.
Here was the Mexican sedulously currying
favour with the gringo, who robbed him for his
pains. And here was the specific example of that
relation which promised to rob Ramon of his
heritage.</p>

<p>For the gringos he felt a cold hostility&mdash;a
sense of antagonism and difference&mdash;but it was his
senile and fatuous uncle, the type of his own defeated
race, whom he despised.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC04" type="chapter">
<pb n="33"/><anchor id="Pg33"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER IV</hi>
</head>

<p>When the music stopped Ramon left the hall
for the hotel lobby, where he soothed his sensibilities
with a small brown cigarette of his own
making. In one of the swinging benches covered
with Navajo blankets two other dress-suited
youths were seated, smoking and talking. One of
them was a short, plump Jew with a round and
gravely good-natured face; the other a tall,
slender young fellow with a great mop of curly
brown hair, large soft eyes and a sensitive mouth.</p>

<p><q>She&rsquo;s good looking, all right,</q> the little fellow
assented, as Ramon came up.</p>

<p><q>Good looking!</q> exclaimed the other with enthusiasm.
<q>She&rsquo;s a little queen! Nothing like
her ever hit this town before.</q></p>

<p><q>Who&rsquo;s all the excitement about?</q> Ramon demanded,
thrusting himself into the conversation
with the easy familiarity which was his right as
one of <q>the bunch.</q></p>

<p>Sidney Felberg turned to him in mock amazement.</p>

<p><q>Good night, Ramon! Where have you been?
Asleep? We&rsquo;re talking about Julia Roth, same
as everybody else.&hellip;</q></p>

<p><q>Who&rsquo;s she?</q> Ramon queried coolly, discharging
<pb n="34"/><anchor id="Pg34"/>
a cloud of smoke from the depths of his lungs.
<q>Never heard of her.</q></p>

<p><q>Well, she&rsquo;s our latest social sensation &hellip; sister
of some rich lunger that recently hit town;
therefore very important. But that&rsquo;s not the only
reason. Wait till you see her.</q></p>

<p><q>All right; introduce me to her,</q> Ramon suggested.</p>

<p><q>Go on; knock him down to the lady,</q> Sidney
proposed to his companion.</p>

<p><q>No, you,</q> Conny demurred. <q>I refuse to
take the responsibility. He&rsquo;s too good looking.</q></p>

<p><q>All right,</q> Sidney assented. <q>Come on. It&rsquo;s
the only way I can get a look at her anyway&mdash;introducing
somebody else. A good-looking girl
in this town can start a regular stampede. We
ought to import a few hundred.&hellip;</q></p>

<p>It was during an intermission. They forced
their way through a phalanx of men brandishing
programs and pencils, each trying to bring himself
exclusively to the attention of a small blonde
person who seemed to have some such quality of
attractiveness for men as spilled honey has for insects.</p>

<p>When Ramon saw her he felt as though something
inside of him had bumped up against his
diaphragm, taking away his breath for a moment,
agitating him strangely. And he saw an answering
<pb n="35"/><anchor id="Pg35"/>
surprised recognition in her wide grey eyes.</p>

<p><q>You &hellip; you&rsquo;re the girl on the train,</q> he remarked
idiotically, as he took her hand.</p>

<p>She turned pink and laughed.</p>

<p><q>You&rsquo;re the man that wouldn&rsquo;t look up,</q> she
mocked.</p>

<p><q>What&rsquo;s all this about?</q> demanded Sidney.
<q>You two met before?</q></p>

<p><q>May I have a dance?</q> Ramon inquired,
suddenly recovering his presence of mind.</p>

<p><q>Let me see &hellip; you&rsquo;re awfully late.</q> They
put their heads close together over her program.
He saw her cut out the name of another man who
had two dances, and then she held her pencil
poised.</p>

<p><q>Of course I didn&rsquo;t get your name,</q> she
admitted<corr sic=","><anchor id="E3"/><ref target="e3">.</ref></corr></p>

<p><q>No; I&rsquo;ll write it &hellip; Was it Carter? Delcasar?
Ramon Delcasar. You must be Spanish. I was
wondering &hellip; you&rsquo;re so dark. I&rsquo;m awfully
interested in Spanish people.&hellip;</q> She wrote
the name in a bold, upright, childish hand.</p>

<p>Ramon found that he had lost his mood of discontent
after this, and he entered with zest into
the spirit of the dance which was fast losing its
stiff and formal character. Punch and music had
broken down barriers. The hall was noisy with
the ringing, high pitched laughter of excitement.
It was warm and filled with an exotic, stimulating
<pb n="36"/><anchor id="Pg36"/>
odour, compounded of many perfumes and of perspiration.
Every one danced. Young folk
danced as though inspired, swaying their bodies in
time to the tune. The old and the fat danced with
pathetic joyful earnestness, going round and round
the hall with red and perspiring faces, as though
in this measure they might recapture youth and
slimness if only they worked hard enough. Now
and then a girl sang a snatch of the tune in a clear
young voice, full of abandon, and sometimes
others took up the song and it rose triumphant
above the music of the orchestra for a moment,
only to be lost again as the singers danced apart.</p>

<p>Ramon had been looking forward so long and
with such intense anticipation to his dance with
Julia Roth that he was a little self-conscious at
its beginning, but this feeling was abolished by
the discovery that they could dance together perfectly.
He danced in silence, looking down upon
her yellow head and white shoulders, the odour of
her hair filling his nostrils, forgetful of everything
but the sensuous delight of the moment.</p>

<p>This mood of solemn rapture was evidently not
shared by her, for presently the yellow head was
thrown back, and she smiled up at him a bit
mockingly.</p>

<p><q>Just like on the train,</q> she remarked. <q>Not
a thing to say for yourself. Are you always thus
silent?</q></p>
<pb n="37"/><anchor id="Pg37"/>

<p>Ramon grinned.</p>

<p><q>No,</q> he countered, <q>I was just trying to get
up the nerve to ask if you&rsquo;ll let me come to see
you.</q></p>

<p><q>That doesn&rsquo;t take much nerve,</q> she assured
him. <q>Practically every man I&rsquo;ve danced with
tonight has asked me that. I never had so many
dates before in my life.</q></p>

<p><q>Well; may I follow the crowd, then?</q></p>

<p><q>You may,</q> she laughed. <q>Or call me up first,
and maybe there won&rsquo;t be any crowd.</q></p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC05" type="chapter">
<pb n="38"/><anchor id="Pg38"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER V</hi>
</head>

<p>His mother and sister had left early, for which
fact he was thankful. He walked home alone
with his hat in his hand, letting the cold wind of
early morning blow on his hot brow. Punch and
music and dancing had filled him with a delightful
excitement. He felt glad of life and full
of power. He could have gone on walking for
hours, enjoying the rhythm of his stride and the
gorgeous confusion of his thoughts, but in a remarkably
short time he had covered the mile to his
house in Old Town.</p>

<p>It was a long, low <hi rend="font-style: italic">adobe</hi>
with a paintless and
rickety wooden verandah along its front, and
with deep-set, iron-barred windows looking upon
the square about which Old Town was built. Delcasars
had lived in this house for over a century.
Once it had been the best in town. Now it was
an antiquity pointed out to tourists. Most of the
Mexicans who had money had moved away from
Old Town and built modern brick houses in New
Town. But this was an expensive proceeding.
The old <hi rend="font-style: italic">adobe</hi> houses which
they left brought them little. The Delcasars had never been able
to afford this removal. They were deeply attached
<pb n="39"/><anchor id="Pg39"/>
to the old house and also deeply ashamed
of it.</p>

<p>Ramon passed through a narrow hallway into
a courtyard and across it to his room. The light
of the oil lamp which he lit showed a large oblong
chamber with a low ceiling supported by heavy
timbers, whitewashed walls and heavy old-fashioned
walnut furniture. A large coloured
print of Mary and the Babe in a gilt frame hung
over the wash-stand, and next to it a college pennant
was tacked over a photograph of his graduating
class. Several Navajo blankets covered
most of the floor and a couple of guns stood in a
corner.</p>

<p>When he was in bed his overstimulated state
of mind became a torment. He rolled and tossed,
beset by exciting images and ideas. Every
time that a growing confusion of these indicated
the approach of sleep, he was brought sharply
back to full consciousness by the crowing of a
rooster in the backyard. Finally he threw off
the covers and sat up, cursing the rooster in two
languages and resolving to eat him.</p>

<p>Sleep was out of the question now. Suddenly
he remembered that this was Sunday morning, and
that he had intended going to the mountains.
To start at once would enable him to avoid an
argument with his mother concerning the inevitability
of damnation for those who miss early
<pb n="40"/><anchor id="Pg40"/>
Mass. He rose and dressed himself, putting
on a cotton shirt, a faded and dirty pair of overalls
and coarse leather riding boots; tied a red
and white bandana about his neck and stuck on his
head an old felt hat minus a band and with a
drooping brim. So attired he looked exactly like
a Mexican countryman&mdash;a poor
<hi rend="font-style: italic">ranchero</hi> or a
woodcutter. This masquerade was not intentional
nor was he conscious of it. He simply wore
for his holiday the kind of clothes he had always
worn about the sheep ranches.</p>

<p>Nevertheless he felt almost as different from
his usual self as he looked. A good part of his
identity as a poor, discontented and somewhat
lazy young lawyer was hanging in the closet with
his ready-made business suit. He took a long
and noisy drink from the pitcher on the wash-stand,
picked up his shot-gun and slipped cautiously
out of the house, feeling care-free and
happy.</p>

<p>Behind the house was a corral with an
<hi rend="font-style: italic">adobe</hi>
wall that was ten feet high except where it
had fallen down and been patched with boards.
A scrub cow and three native horses were kept
there. Two of the horses made the ill-matched
team that hauled his mother and sister to church
and town. The other was a fiery ragged little
roan mare which he kept for his own use. None
of these horses was worth more than thirty dollars,
<pb n="41"/><anchor id="Pg41"/>
and they were easily kept on a few tons of alfalfa
a year.</p>

<p>The little mare laid back her ears and turned as
though to annihilate him with a kick. He quickly
stepped right up against the threatening hind legs,
after the fashion of experienced horsemen who
know that a kick is harmless at short range, and
laid his hand on her side. She trembled but
dared not move. He walked to her head, sliding
his hand along the rough, uncurried belly and
talking to her in Spanish. In a moment he had
the bridle on her.</p>

<p>The town was impressively empty and still as
he galloped through it. Hoof beats rang out like
shots, scaring a late-roaming cat, which darted
across the street like a runaway shadow.</p>

<p>Near the railroad station he came to a large
white van, with a beam of light emerging from
its door. This was a local institution of longstanding,
known as the chile-wagon, and was the
town&rsquo;s only all-night
<corr sic="resturant"><anchor id="E4"/>
<ref target="e4">restaurant</ref></corr>.
Here he aroused
a fat, sleepy old Mexican.</p>

<p><q><hi rend="font-style: italic">Un tamale y cafe</hi>,</q>
he ordered, and then had
the proprietor make him a couple of sandwiches
to put in his pocket. He consumed his breakfast
hurriedly, rolled and lit a little brown cigarette,
and was off again.</p>

<p>His way led up a long steep street lined with new
houses and vacant lots; then out upon the high
<pb n="42"/><anchor id="Pg42"/>
empty level of the <hi rend="font-style: italic">mesa</hi>. It
was daylight now, of a clear, brilliant morning. He was riding
across a level prairie, which was a grey desert most
of the year, but which the rainy season of late summer
had now touched with rich colours. The
grass in many of the hollows was almost high
enough to cut with a scythe, and its green expanse
was patched with purple-flowered weeds. Meadow
larks bugled from the grass; flocks of wild
doves rose on whistling wings from the weed
patches; a great grey jack-rabbit with jet-tipped
ears sprang from his form beside the road and
went sailing away in long effortless bounds, like a
wind-blown thing. Miles ahead were the mountains&mdash;an
angular mass of blue distance and purple
shadow, rising steep five thousand feet above the
<hi rend="font-style: italic">mesa</hi>, with little round
foothills clustering at their
feet. A brisk cool wind fanned his face and
fluttered the brim of his hat.</p>

<p>But with the rising of the sun the wind dropped,
it became warm and he felt dull and sleepy.
When he came to a little juniper bush which spread
its bit of shadow beside the road, he dismounted,
pulled the saddle off his sweating mare,
and sat down in the shade to eat his lunch. When
he had finished he wished for a drink of water and
philosophically took a smoke instead. Then he
lay down, using his saddle for a pillow, puffing
luxuriously at his cigarette. It was cool in his
<pb n="43"/><anchor id="Pg43"/>
bit of shadow, though all the world about him
swam in waves of heat.&hellip; Cool and very quiet.
He felt drowsily content. This sunny desolation
was to him neither lonely nor beautiful; it was
just his own country, the soil from which he had
sprung.&hellip; Colours and outlines blurred as his
eyelids grew heavy. Sleep conquered him in a sudden
black rush.</p>

<p>It was late afternoon when he awakened. He
had meant to shoot doves, but it was too late now
to do any hunting if he was to reach Archulera&rsquo;s
place before dark. He saddled his mare hurriedly
and went forward at a hard gallop.</p>

<p>Archulera&rsquo;s place was typical of the little Mexican
ranches that dot the Southwest wherever there
is water enough to irrigate a few acres. The
brown block of <hi rend="font-style: italic">adobe</hi> house stood
on an arid, rocky hillside, and looked like a part of it, save
for the white door, and a few bright scarlet strings
of <hi rend="font-style: italic">chile</hi> hung over the
rafter ends to dry. Down
in the <hi rend="font-style: italic">arroyo</hi> was the
little fenced patch where
corn and <hi rend="font-style: italic">chile</hi> and beans
were raised, and behind
the house was a round goat corral of wattled
brush. The skyward rocky waste of the mountain
lifted behind the house, and the empty reach of
the <hi rend="font-style: italic">mesa</hi> lay before&mdash;an
immense and arid loneliness,
now softened and beautified by many
shadows.</p>

<p>Ramon could see old man Archulera far up the
<pb n="44"/><anchor id="Pg44"/>
mountainside, rounding up his goats for evening
milking, and he could faintly hear the bleating
of the animals and the old man&rsquo;s shouts and
imprecations. He whistled loudly through his
fingers and waved his hat.</p>

<p><hi rend="font-style: italic"><q>Como lo va primo!</q></hi>
he shouted, and he saw
Archulera stop and look, and heard faintly his
answering, <hi rend="font-style: italic"><q>Como la va!</q></hi></p>

<p>Soon Archulera had his goats penned, and
Ramon joined him while he milked half a dozen
ewes.</p>

<p><q>I&rsquo;m glad you came,</q> Archulera told him, <q>I
haven&rsquo;t seen a man in a month except one gringo
that said he was a prospector and stole a kid
from me.&hellip; How was the fair?</q></p>

<p>When the milking was over, the old man selected
a fat kid, caught it by the hind leg and
dragged it, bleating in wild terror, to a gallows
behind the house, where he hung it up and skilfully
cut its throat, leaving it to bleat and bleed
to death while he wiped his knife and went on
talking volubly with his guest. The occasional
visits of Ramon were the most interesting events
in his life, and he always killed a kid to express
his appreciation. Ramon reciprocated with gifts
of tobacco and whisky. They were great friends.</p>

<p>Archulera was a short, muscular Mexican
with a swarthy, wrinkled face, broad but well-cut.
His big, thin-lipped mouth showed an amazing
<pb n="45"/><anchor id="Pg45"/>
disarray of strong yellow teeth when he smiled.
His little black eyes were shrewd and full of
fire. Although he was sixty years old, there
was little grey in the thick black hair that hung
almost to his shoulders. He wore a cheap print
shirt and a faded pair of overalls, belted at the
waist with a strip of red wool. His foot-gear
consisted of the uppers of a pair of old shoes with
soles of rawhide sewed on moccasin-fashion.</p>

<p>With no more disguise than a red blanket and
a grunt Archulera could have passed for an Indian
anywhere, but he made it clear to all that he regarded
himself as a Spanish gentleman. He
was descended, like Ramon, from one of the old
families, which had received occasional infusions
of native blood. There was probably more Indian
in him than in the young man, but the chief
difference between the two was due to the fact that
the Archuleras had lost most of their wealth a
couple of generations before, so that the old man
had come down in the social scale to the condition
of an ordinary goat-herding <hi rend="font-style: italic">pelado</hi>.
There are many such fallen aristocrats among the New
Mexican peasantry. Most of them, like Archulera,
are distinguished by their remarkably choice
and fluent use of the Spanish language, and by the
formal, eighteenth-century perfection of their
manners, which contrast strangely with the barbaric
way of their lives.</p>
<pb n="46"/><anchor id="Pg46"/>

<p>The old man was now skinning and butchering
the goat with speed and skill. Nothing was
wasted. The hide was flung over a rafter end to
dry. The head was washed and put in a pan, as
were the smaller entrails with bits of fat clinging
to them, and the liver and heart. The meat was
too fresh to be eaten tonight, but these things
would serve well enough for supper, and he called
to his daughter, Catalina, to come and get them.</p>

<p>The two men soon joined her in the low, whitewashed
room, which had hard mud for a floor,
and was furnished with a bare table and a few
chairs. It was clean, but having only one window
and that always closed, it had a pronounced and
individual odour. In one corner was a little fireplace,
which had long served both for cooking
and to furnish heat, but as a concession to
modern ideas Archulera had lately supplemented
it with a cheap range in the opposite corner.
There Catalina was noisily distilling an aroma
from goat liver and onions. The entrails she
threaded on little sticks and broiled them to a
delicate brown over the coals, while the head she
placed whole in the oven. Later this was cracked
open and the brains taken out with a spoon, piping
hot and very savoury. These viands were supplemented
by a pan of large pale biscuits, and a big
tin pot of coffee. Catalina served the two men,
saying nothing, not even raising her eyes, while
<pb n="47"/><anchor id="Pg47"/>
they talked and paid no attention to her. After
eating her own supper and washing the dishes she
disappeared into the next room.</p>

<p>This self-effacing behaviour on the part of the
girl accorded with the highest standards of Mexican
etiquette, and showed her good breeding.
The fact that old Archulera paid no more attention
to her than to a chair did not indicate that he
was indifferent to her. On the contrary, as Ramon
had long ago discovered, she was one of the
chief concerns of his life. He could not forget
that in her veins flowed some of the very best of
Spanish blood, and he considered her altogether
too good for the common sheep-herders and wood-cutters
who aspired to woo her. These he summarily
warned away, and brought his big Winchester
rifle into the argument whenever it became
warm. When he left the girl alone, in order to
guard her from temptation he locked her into the
house together with his dog. Catalina had led a
starved and isolated existence.</p>

<p>After the meal, Archulera became reminiscent
of his youth. Some thirty-five years before he
had been one of the young bloods of the country,
having fought against the Navajos and Apaches.
He had made a reputation, long since forgotten
by every one but himself, for ruthless courage
and straight shooting, and many a man had he
killed. In his early life, as he had often told
<pb n="48"/><anchor id="Pg48"/>
Ramon, he had been a boon companion of old
Diego Delcasar. The two had been associated
in some mining venture, and Archulera claimed
that Delcasar had cheated him out of his share of
the proceeds, and so doomed him to his present
life of poverty. When properly stimulated by
food and drink Archulera never failed to tell this
story, and to express his hatred for the man who
had deprived him of wealth and social position.
He had at first approached the subject diffidently,
not knowing how Ramon would regard an attack
on the good name of his uncle, and being anxious
not to offend the young man. But finding that
Ramon listened tolerantly, if not sympathetically,
he had told the story over and over, each time
with more detail and more abundant and picturesque
denunciation of Diego Delcasar, but with
substantial uniformity as to the facts. As he
spoke he watched the face of Ramon narrowly.
Always the recital ended about the same way.</p>

<p><q>You are not like your uncle,</q> he assured the
young man earnestly, in his formal Spanish.
<q>You are generous, honourable. When your
uncle is dead, you will repay me for the wrongs
that I have suffered&mdash;no?</q></p>

<p>Ramon would always laugh at this. This night,
in order to humour the old man, he asked him how
much he thought the Delcasar estate owed him
for his ancient wrong.</p>
<pb n="49"/><anchor id="Pg49"/>

<p><q>Five thousand dollars!</q> Archulera replied
with slow emphasis. He probably had no idea
how much he had lost, but five thousand dollars
was his conception of a great deal of money.</p>

<p>Ramon again laughed and refused to commit
himself. He certainly had no idea of giving
Archulera five thousand dollars, but he thought
that if he ever did come into his own he would
certainly take care of the old man&mdash;and of
Catalina.</p>

<p>Soon after this Archulera went off to sleep in the
other end of the house, after trying in vain to
persuade Ramon to occupy his bed. Ramon, as
always, refused. He would sleep on a pile of
sheep skins in the corner. He really preferred
this, because the sheep skins were both cleaner and
softer than Archulera&rsquo;s bed, and also for another
reason.</p>

<p>After the old man had gone, he stretched out
on his pallet, and lit another cigarette. He could
hear his host thumping around for a few minutes;
then it was very still, save for a faint moan of
wind and the ticking of a cheap clock. This
late still hour had always been to him one of the
most delightful parts of his visits to Archulera&rsquo;s
house. For some reason he got a sense of peace
and freedom out of this far-away quiet place.
And he knew that in the next room Catalina
was waiting for him&mdash;Catalina with the strong,
<pb n="50"/><anchor id="Pg50"/>
shapely brown body which her formless calico
smock concealed by day, with the eager, blind
desire bred of her long loneliness.</p>

<p>During his first few visits to Archulera, he
had scarcely noticed the girl. That was doubtless
one reason why the old man had welcomed him.
He had come here simply to go deer-hunting with
Archulera, to eat his goat meat and chile, to get
away from the annoyance and boredom of his life
in town, and into the crude, primitive atmosphere
which he had loved as a boy. Catalina had been
to him just the usual slovenly figure of a Mexican
woman, a self-effacing drudge.</p>

<p>He had felt her eyes upon him several times,
had not looked up quickly enough to meet them,
but had noticed the pretty soft curve of her cheek.
Then one night when he was stretched out on his
sheep skins after Archulera had gone to bed, the
girl came into the room and began pottering
about the stove. He had watched her, wondering
what she was doing. As she knelt on the floor
he noticed the curve of her hip, the droop of her
breast against her frock, the surprising round perfection
of her outstretched arm. It struck him
suddenly that she was a woman to be desired, and
one who might be taken with ease. At the same
time, with a quickening of the blood, he realized
that she was doing nothing, and had merely come
into the room to attract his attention. Then she
<pb n="51"/><anchor id="Pg51"/>
glanced at him, daring but shy, with great brown
eyes, like the eyes of a gentle animal. When she
went back to her own room a moment later, he
confidently followed.</p>

<p>Ever since then Catalina had been the chief object
of his week-end journeys, and his hunting
largely an excuse. She had completed this life
which he led in the mountains, and which was so
pleasantly different from his life in town. For
a part of the week he was a poor, young lawyer,
watchful, worried, careful; then for a couple of
days he was a ragged young Mexican and the lover
of Catalina&mdash;a different man. He was the product
of a transition, and two beings warred in
him. In town he was dominated by the desire
to be like the Americans, and to gain a foothold
in their life of law, greed and respectability; in
the mountains he relapsed unconsciously into the
easy barbarous ways of his fathers. Incidentally,
this periodical change of personality was refreshing
and a source of strength. Catalina had been
an important part of it.&hellip; As he lay now
sleepily puffing a last cigarette, he wondered why
it was that he had suddenly lost interest in the
girl.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC06" type="chapter">
<pb n="52"/><anchor id="Pg52"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER VI</hi>
</head>

<p>At ten o&rsquo;clock in the morning Ramon was hard
at work in the office of James B. Green. He
worked efficiently and with zest as he always did
after one of his trips to the mountains. He got
out of these ventures into another environment
about what some men get out of sprees&mdash;a complete
change of the state of mind. Archulera and
his daughter were now completely forgotten, and
all of his usual worries and plans were creeping
back into his consciousness.</p>

<p>But this day he had a feeling of pleasant anticipation.
At first he could not account for it.
And then he remembered the girl&mdash;the one he had
seen on the train and had met again at the
Montezuma ball. It seemed as though the
thought of her had been in the back of his mind
all the time, and now suddenly came forward,
claiming all his attention, stirring him to a quick,
unwonted excitement. She had said he might
come to see her. He was to &rsquo;phone first. Maybe
she would be alone.&hellip;</p>

<p>In this latter hope he was disappointed. She
gave him the appointment, and she herself admitted
him. He thought he had never seen such
<pb n="53"/><anchor id="Pg53"/>
a dainty bit of fragrant perfection, all in pink that
matched the pink of her strange little crinkled
mouth.</p>

<p><q>I&rsquo;m awfully glad you came,</q> she told him.
(Her gladness was always awful.) She led him
into the sitting room and presented him to the tall
emaciated sick man and the large placid woman
who had watched over her so carefully on the
train.</p>

<p>Gordon Roth greeted him with a cool and
formal manner into which he evidently tried to
infuse something of cordiality, as though a desire
to be just and broad-minded struggled with prejudice.
Mrs. Roth looked at him with curiosity,
and gave him a still more restrained greeting.
The conversation was a weak and painful affair,
kept barely alive, now by one and now by another.
The atmosphere was heavy with disapproval. If
their greetings had left Ramon in any doubt as
to the attitude of the girl&rsquo;s family toward him,
that doubt was removed by the fact that neither
Mrs. Roth nor her son showed any intention of
leaving the room. This would have been not unusual
if he had called on a Mexican girl, especially
if she belonged to one of the more old-fashioned
families; but he knew that American girls
are left alone with their suitors if the suitor is at
all welcome.</p>

<p>He knew a little about this family from hear-say.
<pb n="54"/><anchor id="Pg54"/>
They came from one of the larger factory
towns in northern New York, and were supposed
to be moderately wealthy. They used a very
broad <q>a</q> and served tea at four o&rsquo;clock in the
afternoon. Gordon Roth was a Harvard graduate
and did not conceal the fact. Neither did
he conceal his hatred for this sandy little western
town, where ill-health had doomed him to spend
many of his days and perhaps to end them.</p>

<p>The girl was strangely different from her
mother and brother. Whereas their expressions
were stiff and solemn, her eyes showed an irrepressible
gleam of humour, and her fascinating
little mouth was mobile with mirth. She fidgeted
around in her chair a good deal, as a child does
when bored.</p>

<p>Mrs. Roth decorously turned the conversation
toward the safe and reliable subjects of literature
and art.</p>

<p><q>What do you think of Maeterlinck, Mr. Delcasar?</q>
she enquired in an innocent manner that
must have concealed malice.</p>

<p><q>I don&rsquo;t know him,</q> Ramon admitted, <q>Who
is he?</q></p>

<p>Mrs. Roth permitted herself to smile. Gordon
Roth came graciously to the rescue.</p>

<p><q>Maeterlinck is a great Belgian writer,</q> he
explained. <q>We are all very much interested in
him.&hellip;</q></p>
<pb n="55"/><anchor id="Pg55"/>

<p>Julia gave a little flounce in her chair, and
crossed her legs with a defiant look at her
mother.</p>

<p><q>I&rsquo;m not interested in him,</q> she announced
with decision. <q>I think he&rsquo;s a bore. Listen,
Mr. Delcasar. You know Conny Masters?
Well, he was telling me the most thrilling tale
the other day. He said that the country Mexicans
have a sort of secret religious fraternity
that most of the men belong to, and that they
meet every Good Friday and beat themselves with
whips and sit down on cactus and crucify a man on
a cross and all sorts of horrible things &hellip; for
penance you know, just like the monks and things
in the Middle Ages.&hellip; He claims he saw
them once and that they had blood running down
to their heels. Is that all true? I&rsquo;ve forgotten
what he called them.&hellip;</q></p>

<p>Ramon nodded.</p>

<p><q>Sure. The <hi rend="font-style: italic">penitentes</hi>.
I&rsquo;ve seen them lots of times.</q></p>

<p><q>O, do tell us about them. I love to hear
about horrible things.</q></p>

<p><q>Well, I&rsquo;ve seen lots of
<hi rend="font-style: italic">penitente</hi> processions,
but the best one I ever saw was a long time ago,
when I was a little kid. There are not so many
of them now, and they don&rsquo;t do as much as they
used to. The church is down on them, you know,
and they&rsquo;re afraid. Ten years ago if you tried
<pb n="56"/><anchor id="Pg56"/>
to look at them, they would shoot at you, but now
tourists take pictures of them.</q></p>

<p>Gordon Roth&rsquo;s curiosity had been aroused.</p>

<p><q>Tell me,</q> he broke in. <q>What is the meaning
of this thing? How did it get started?</q></p>

<p><q>I don&rsquo;t know exactly,</q> Ramon admitted.
<q>My grandfather told me that they brought it
over from Spain centuries ago, and the Indians
here had a sort of whipping fraternity, and the
two got mixed up, I guess. The church used to
tolerate it; it was a regular religious festival.
But now it&rsquo;s outlawed. They still have a lot of
political power. They all vote the same way.
One man that was elected to Congress&mdash;they say
that the <hi rend="font-style: italic">penitente</hi>
stripes on his back carried him
there. And he was a gringo too. But I don&rsquo;t
know. It may be a lie.&hellip;</q></p>

<p><q>But tell us about that procession you saw when
you were a little boy,</q> Julia broke in. She was
leaning forward with her chin in her hand, and
her big grey eyes, wide with interest, fixed upon
his face.</p>

<p><q rend="post: none">Well, I was only about ten years old, and I
was riding home from one of our ranches with my
father. We were coming through <hi rend="font-style: italic">Tijeras</hi>
canyon. It was March, and there was snow on the ground
in patches, and the mountains were cold and bare,
and I remember I thought I was going to freeze.
Every little while we would get off and set fire to
<pb n="57"/><anchor id="Pg57"/>
a tumble-weed by the road, and warm our hands
and then go on again.&hellip;
</q></p>

<p><q>Anyway, pretty soon I heard a lot of men singing,
all together, in deep voices, and the noise
echoed around the canyon and sounded awful solemn.
And I could hear, too, the slap of the big
wide whips coming down on the bare backs, wet
with blood, like slapping a man with a wet towel,
only louder. I didn&rsquo;t know what it was, but my
father did, and he called to me and we spurred
our horses right up the mountain, and hid in a
clump of cedar up there. Then they came around
a bend in the road, and I began to cry because
they were all covered with blood, and one of them
fell down.&hellip; My father slapped me and told
me to shut up, or they would come and shoot us.</q></p>

<p><q>But what did they look like? What were
they doing?</q> Julia demanded frowning at him,
impatient with his rambling narrative.</p>

<p><q>Well, in front there was <hi rend="font-style: italic">un
carreta del muerto</hi>.
That means a wagon of death. I don&rsquo;t think you
would ever see one any more. It was just an ordinary
wagon drawn by six men, naked to the
waist and bleeding, with other men walking beside
them and beating them with blacksnake whips,
just like they were mules. In the wagon they had
a big bed of stones, covered with cactus, and a man
sitting in the cactus, who was supposed to represent
death. And then they had a Virgin Mary,
<pb n="58"/><anchor id="Pg58"/>
too. Four <hi rend="font-style: italic">penitentes</hi> just
like the others, with
nothing on but bloody pants and black bandages
around their eyes, carried the image on a litter
raised up over their heads, and they had swords
fastened to their elbows and stuck between their
ribs, so that if they let down, the swords would
stick into their hearts and kill them. And behind
that came the <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cristo</hi>&mdash;the
man that represented
Jesus, you know, dragging a big cross. Behind
him came twenty or thirty more
<hi rend="font-style: italic">penitentes</hi>, the
most I ever saw at once, some of them whipping
themselves with big broad whips made out of
<hi rend="font-style: italic">amole</hi>. One
was too weak to whip himself, so
two others walked behind him and whipped him.
Pretty soon he fell down and they walked over
him and stepped on his stomach.&hellip;</q></p>

<p><q>But did they crucify the man, the whatever-you-call-him?</q>
Gordon demanded.</p>

<p><q>The <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cristo</hi>. Sure.
They crucify one every
year. They used to nail him. Now they generally
do it with ropes, but that&rsquo;s bad enough, because
it makes him swell up and turn blue.&hellip;
Sometimes he dies.</q></p>

<p>Julia was listening with lips parted and eyes
wide, horrified and yet fascinated, as are so many
women by what is cruel and bloody. But Gordon,
who had become equally interested, was cool
and inquisitive.</p>

<p><q>And you mean to tell me that at one time
<pb n="59"/><anchor id="Pg59"/>
nearly all the&mdash;er&mdash;native people belonged to this
barbaric organization, and that many of them do
yet?</q></p>

<p><q>Nearly all the common
<hi rend="font-style: italic">pelados</hi>,</q> Ramon
hastened to explain. <q>They are nearly all Indian
or part Indian, you know. Not the educated people.</q>
Here a note of pride came into his voice.
<q>We are descended from officers of the Spanish
army&mdash;the men who conquered this country. In
the old days, before the Americans came, all these
common people were our slaves.</q></p>

<p><q>I see,</q> said Gordon Roth in a dry and judicial
tone.</p>

<p>The <hi rend="font-style: italic">penitentes</hi>,
as a subject of conversation,
seemed exhausted for the time being and Ramon
had given up all hope of being alone with Julia.
He rose and took his leave. To his delight Julia
followed him to the door. In the hall she gave
him her hand and looked up at him, and neither
of them found anything to say. For some reason
the pressure of her hand and the look of her eyes
flustered and confused him more than had all the
coldness and disapproval of her family. At
last he said good-bye and got away, with his hat
on wrong side before and the blood pounding in
his temples.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC07" type="chapter">
<pb n="60"/><anchor id="Pg60"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER VII</hi>
</head>

<p>During the following weeks Ramon worked
even less than was his custom. He also neglected
his trips to the mountains and most of his other
amusements. They seemed to have lost their
interest for him. But he was a regular attendant
upon the weekly dances which were held at the
country club, and to which he had never gone
before.</p>

<p>The country club was a recent acquisition of
the town, backed by a number of local business
men. It consisted of a picturesque little frame
lodge far out upon the <hi rend="font-style: italic">mesa</hi>,
and a nine-hole golf
course, made of sand and haunted by
<corr sic="lizzards"><anchor id="E5"/>
<ref target="e5">lizards</ref></corr> and
rattlesnakes. It had become a centre of local
society, although there was a more exclusive
organization known as the Forty Club, which gave
a formal ball once a month. Ramon had
never been invited to join the Forty Club, but the
political importance of his family had procured
him a membership in the country club and it served
his present purpose very well, for he found Julia
Roth there every Saturday night. This fact was
the sole reason for his going. His dances with
her were now the one thing in life to which he
<pb n="61"/><anchor id="Pg61"/>
looked forward with pleasure, and his highest
hope was that he might be alone with her.</p>

<p>In this he was disappointed for a long time because
Julia was the belle of the town. Her
dainty, provocative presence seemed always to be
the centre of the gathering. Women envied her
and studied her frocks, which were easily the
most stylish in town. Men flocked about her and
guffawed at her elfin stabs of humour. Her
program was always crowded with names, and
when she went for a stroll between dances she
was generally accompanied by at least three men
of whom Ramon was often one. And while the
others made her laugh at their jokes or thrilled
her with accounts of their adventures, he was
always silent and worried&mdash;an utter bore, he
thought.</p>

<p>This girl was a new experience to him. With
the egotism of twenty-four, he had regarded himself
as a finished man of the world, especially with
regard to women. They had always liked him.
He was good to look at and his silent, self-possessed
manner touched the feminine imagination.
He had had his share of the amorous adventures
that come to most men, and his attitude toward
women had changed from the hesitancy of adolesence
to the purposeful, confident and somewhat
selfish attitude of the male accustomed to easy
conquest.</p>
<pb n="62"/><anchor id="Pg62"/>

<p>This girl, by a smile and touch of her hand,
seemed to have changed him. She filled him with
a mighty yearning. He desired her, and yet there
was a puzzling element in his feeling that seemed
to transcend desire. And he was utterly without
his usual confidence and purpose. He had reason
enough to doubt his success, but aside from that
she loomed in his imagination as something
high and unattainable. He had no plan. His
strength seemed to have oozed out of him. He
pursued her persistently enough&mdash;in fact too
persistently&mdash;but he did it because he could not
help it.</p>

<p>The longer he followed in her wake, the more
marked his weakness became. When he approached
her to claim a dance he was often aware
of a faint tremble in his knees, and was embarrassed
by the fact that the palms of his hands were
sweating. He felt that he was a fool and swore
at himself. And he was wholly unable to believe
that he was making any impression upon her.
True, she was quite willing to flirt with him.
She looked up at him with an arch, almost enquiring
glance when he came to claim her for a dance,
but he seldom found much to say at such times,
being too wholly absorbed in the sacred occupation
of dancing with her. And it seemed to him
that she flirted with every one else, too. This
did not in the least mitigate his devotion, but it
<pb n="63"/><anchor id="Pg63"/>
made him acutely uncomfortable to watch her
dance with other men, and especially with Conny
Masters.</p>

<p>Masters was the son of a man who had made
a moderate fortune in the tin-plate business. He
had come West with his mother who had a weak
throat, had fallen in love with the country, and
scandalized his family by resolutely refusing to
go back to Indiana and tin cans. He spent most
of his time riding about the country, equipped with
a note book and a camera, studying the Mexicans
and Indians, and taking pictures of the scenery.
He said that he was going to make a literary
career, but the net product of his effort for two
years had been a few sonnets of lofty tone but
vague meaning, and a great many photographs,
mostly of sunsets.</p>

<p>Conny was not a definite success as a writer,
but he was unquestionably a gifted talker, and
he knew the country better than did most of the
natives. He made real to Julia the romance
which she craved to find in the West. And her
watchful and suspicious family seemed to tolerate
if not to welcome him. Ramon knew that he
went to the Roth&rsquo;s regularly. He began to feel
something like hatred for Conny whom he had
formerly liked.</p>

<p>This feeling was deepened by the fact that
Conny seemed to be specially bent on defeating
<pb n="64"/><anchor id="Pg64"/>
Ramon&rsquo;s ambition to be alone with the girl. If
no one else joined them at the end of a dance,
Conny was almost sure to do so, and to occupy
the intermission with one of his ever-ready monologues,
while Ramon sat silent and angry, wondering
what Julia saw to admire in this windy fool,
and occasionally daring to wonder whether she
really saw anything in him after all.</p>

<p>But a sufficiently devoted lover is seldom wholly
without a reward. There came an evening when
Ramon found himself alone with her. And he
was aware with a thrill that she had evaded not
only Conny, but two other men. Her smile was
friendly and encouraging, too, and yet he could
not find anything to say which in the least expressed
his feelings.</p>

<p><q>Are you going to stay in this country long?</q>
he began. The question sounded supremely
casual, but it meant a great deal to him. He
was haunted by a fear that she would depart
suddenly, and he would never see her again. She
smiled and looked away for a moment before replying,
as though perhaps this was not exactly
what she had expected him to say.</p>

<p><q>I don&rsquo;t know. Gordon wants mother and
me to go back East this fall, but I don&rsquo;t want to go
and mother doesn&rsquo;t want to leave Gordon
alone.&hellip; We haven&rsquo;t decided. Maybe I
won&rsquo;t go till next year.</q></p>
<pb n="65"/><anchor id="Pg65"/>

<p><q>I suppose you&rsquo;ll go to college won&rsquo;t you?</q></p>

<p><q>No; I wanted to go to Vassar and then study
art, but mother says college spoils a girl for
society. She thinks the way the Vassar girls
walk is perfectly dreadful. I offered to go right
on walking the same way, but she said anyway
college makes girls so frightfully broad-minded.&hellip;</q></p>

<p>Ramon laughed.</p>

<p><q>What will you do then?</q></p>

<p><q>I&rsquo;ll come out.</q></p>

<p><q>Out of what?</q></p>

<p><q>Make my d�but, don&rsquo;t you know?</q></p>

<p><q>O, yes.</q></p>

<p><q>In New York. I have an aunt there. She
knows all the best people, mother says.</q></p>

<p><q>What happens after you come out?</q></p>

<p><q>You get married if anybody will have you.
If not, you sort of fade away and finally go into
uplift work about your fourth season.</q></p>

<p><q>But of course, you&rsquo;ll get married. I bet
you&rsquo;ll marry a millionaire.</q></p>

<p><q>I don&rsquo;t know. Mother wants me to marry a
broker. She says the big financial houses in New
York are conducted by the very best people.
But Gordon thinks I ought to marry a professional
man&mdash;a doctor or something. He thinks
brokers are vulgar. He says money isn&rsquo;t everything.</q></p>
<pb n="66"/><anchor id="Pg66"/>

<p><q>What do you think?</q></p>

<p><q>I haven&rsquo;t a thought to my name. All my
thinking has been done for me since infancy. I
don&rsquo;t know what I want, but I&rsquo;m pretty sure I
wouldn&rsquo;t get it if I did.&hellip; Come on. They&rsquo;ve
been dancing for ten minutes. If we stay here
any longer it&rsquo;ll be a scandal.</q></p>

<p>She rose and started for the hall. He suddenly
realized that his long-sought opportunity
was slipping away from him. He caught her by
the hand.</p>

<p><q>Don&rsquo;t go, please. I want to tell you something.</q></p>

<p>She met his hand with a fair grip, and pulled
him after her with a laugh.</p>

<p><q>Some other time,</q> she promised.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC08" type="chapter">
<pb n="67"/><anchor id="Pg67"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER VIII<corr
    sic="."><anchor id="E6"/><ref target="e6">&nbsp;</ref></corr></hi>
</head>

<p>In most of their social diversions the town folk
tended always more and more to ape the ways of
the East. Local colour, they thought, was all
right in its place, which was a curio store or a
museum, but they desired their town to be modern
and citified, so that the wealthy eastern health-seeker
would find it a congenial home. The
scenery and the historic past were recognized as
assets, but they should be the background for a
life of <q>culture, refinement and modern convenience</q>
as the president of the Chamber of Commerce
was fond of saying.</p>

<p>Hence the riding parties and picnics of a few
years before had given way to aggressively formal
balls and receptions; but one form of entertainment
that was indigenous had survived. This
was known as a <q><hi rend="font-style: italic">mesa</hi>
supper.</q> It might take
place anywhere in the surrounding wilderness of
mountain and desert. Several auto-loads of
young folk would motor out, suitably chaperoned
and laden with provisions. Beside some water
hole or mountain stream fires would be built,
steaks broiled and coffee brewed. Afterward
<pb n="68"/><anchor id="Pg68"/>
there would be singing and story-telling about the
fire, and romantic strolls by couples.</p>

<p>It was one of these expeditions that furnished
Ramon with his second opportunity in three weeks
to be alone with Julia Roth. The party had journeyed
to Los Ojuellos, where a spring of clear
water bubbled up in the centre of the
<hi rend="font-style: italic">mesa</hi>. A
grove of cottonwood trees shadowed the place,
and there was an ancient
<hi rend="font-style: italic">adobe</hi> ruin which looked
especially effective by moonlight.</p>

<p>The persistent Conny Masters was a member
of the party, but he was handicapped by the fact
that he knew more about camp cookery than anyone
else present. He had made a special study
of Mexican dishes and had written an article
about them which had been rejected by no less than
twenty-seven magazines. He made a specialty
of the <hi rend="font-style: italic">enchilada</hi>,
which is a delightful concoction
of corn meal, eggs and chile, and he had perfected
a recipe of his own for this dish which he had
named the Conny Masters junior.</p>

<p>As soon as the baskets were unpacked and the
chaperones were safely anchored on rugs and
blankets with their backs against trees, there was
a general demand, strongly backed by Ramon,
that Conny should cook supper. He was soon
absorbed in the process, volubly explaining every
step, while the others gathered about him and offered
<pb n="69"/><anchor id="Pg69"/>
encouragement and humorous suggestion.
But there was soon a gradual dispersion of the
group, some going for wood and some for water,
and others on errands unstated.</p>

<p>Ramon found himself strolling under the
cottonwoods with Julia. Neither of them had
said anything. It was almost as though the tryst
had been agreed upon before. She picked her
way slowly among the tussocks of dried grass, her
skirt daintily kilted. A faint but potent perfume
from her hair and dress blew over him. He
ventured to support her elbow with a reverent
touch. Never had she seemed more desirable,
nor yet, for some reason, more remote.</p>

<p>Suddenly she stopped and looked up at the
great desert stars.</p>

<p><q>Isn&rsquo;t it big and beautiful?</q> she demanded.
<q>And doesn&rsquo;t it make you feel free? It&rsquo;s never
like this at home, somehow.</q></p>

<p><q>What is it like where you live?</q> he enquired.
He had a persistent desire to see into her life and
understand it, but everything she told him only
made her more than ever to him a being of mysterious
origin and destiny.</p>

<p><q>It&rsquo;s a funny little New York factory city with
very staid ways,</q> she said. <q>You go to a dance
at the country club every Saturday night and to
tea parties and things in between. You fight,
<pb n="70"/><anchor id="Pg70"/>
bleed and die for your social position and
once in a while you stop and wonder why.&hellip;
It&rsquo;s a bore. You can see yourself going on doing
the same thing till the day of your death.&hellip;</q></p>

<p>Her discontent with things as they are found
ready sympathy.</p>

<p><q>That&rsquo;s just the way it is here,</q> he said with
conviction. <q>You can&rsquo;t see anything ahead.</q></p>

<p><q>Oh, I don&rsquo;t think its the same here at all,</q> she
protested. <q>This country&rsquo;s so big and interesting.
It&rsquo;s different.</q></p>

<p><q>Tell me how,</q> he demanded. <q>I haven&rsquo;t seen
anything interesting here since I got back,&mdash;except
you.</q></p>

<p>She ignored the exception.</p>

<p><q>I can&rsquo;t express it exactly. The people here are
just like people everywhere else&mdash;most of them.
But the country looks so big and unoccupied. And
blue mountains are so alluring. There might be
anything beyond them &hellip; adventures, opportunities.&hellip;</q></p>

<p>This idea was a bit too rarefied for Ramon, but
he could agree about the mountains.</p>

<p><q>It&rsquo;s a fine country,</q> he assented. <q>For those
that own it.</q></p>

<p><q>It&rsquo;s just a feeling I have about it,</q> she went
on, trying to express her own half-formulated
idea. <q>But then I have that feeling about life in
<pb n="71"/><anchor id="Pg71"/>
general, and there doesn&rsquo;t seem to be anything in
it. I mean the feeling that it&rsquo;s full of thrilling
things, but somehow you miss them all.</q></p>

<p><q>I have felt something like that,</q> he admitted.
<q>But I never could say it.</q></p>

<p>This discovery of an idea in common seemed
somehow to bring them closer together. His
hand tightened gently about her arm; almost unconsciously
he drew her toward him. But she
seemed to be all absorbed in the discussion.</p>

<p><q>You have no right to complain,</q> she told him.
<q>A man can do something about it.</q></p>

<p><q>Yes,</q> he agreed, speaking a reflection without
stopping to put it in conventional language. <q>It
must be hell to be a woman &hellip; excuse me &hellip; I mean.&hellip;</q></p>

<p><q>Don&rsquo;t apologize. It is&mdash;just that. A man
at least has a fighting chance to escape boredom.
But they won&rsquo;t even let a woman fight. I wish
I were a man.</q></p>

<p><q>Well; I don&rsquo;t,</q> he asserted with warmth, unconsciously
tightening his hold upon her arm. <q>I
can&rsquo;t tell you how glad I am that you&rsquo;re a woman.</q></p>

<p><q>Oh, are you?</q> She looked up at him with
challenging, provocative eyes.</p>

<p>For an instant a kiss was imminent. It hovered
between them like an invisible fairy presence
<pb n="72"/><anchor id="Pg72"/>
of which they both were sweetly aware, and no
one else.</p>

<p><q>Hey there! all you spooners!</q> came a jovial
and irreverent voice from the vicinity of the camp
fire. <q>Come and eat.</q></p>

<p>The moment was lost; the fairy presence gone.
She turned with a little laugh, and they went in
silence back to the fire. They were last to enter
the circle of ruddy light, and all eyes were upon
them. She was pink and self-conscious, looking
at her feet and picking her way with exaggerated
care. He was proud and elated. This, he
knew, would couple their names in gossip, would
make her partly his.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC09" type="chapter">
<pb n="73"/><anchor id="Pg73"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER IX</hi>
</head>

<p>He wanted to call on her again, but he felt that
he had been insulted and rejected by the Roths,
and his pride fought against it. Unable to think
for long of anything but Julia he fell into the
habit of walking by her house at night, looking at
its lighted windows and wondering what she was
doing. Often he could see the moving figures
and hear the laughter of some gay group about
her, but he could not bring himself to go in and
face the chilly disapproval of her family. At
such times he felt an utter outcast, and sounded
depths of misery he had never known before.
For this was his first real love, and he loved in
the helpless, desperate way of the Latin, without
calculation or humour.</p>

<p>One evening there was a gathering on the
porch of the Roth house. She was there, sitting
on the steps with three men about her. He
could see the white blur of her frock and hear her
funny little bubbling laugh above the deeper
voices of the men. Having ascertained that
neither Gordon Roth nor his mother was there,
he summoned his courage and went in. She
<pb n="74"/><anchor id="Pg74"/>
could not see who he was until he stood almost
over her.</p>

<p><q>O, it&rsquo;s you! I&rsquo;m awfully glad.&hellip;</q> Their
hands met and clung for a moment in the darkness.
He sat down on the steps at her feet, and
the conversation moved on without any assistance
from him. He was now just as happy as he had
been miserable a few minutes before.</p>

<p>Presently two of the other men went away, but
the third, who was Conny Masters, stayed. He
talked volubly as ever, telling wonderful and
sometimes incredible stories of things he had seen
and done in his wanderings. Ramon said nothing.
Julia responded less and less. Once she
moved to drop the wrap from about her shoulders,
and the alert Conny hastened to assist her.
Ramon watched and envied with a thumping
heart as he saw the gleam of her bare white
shoulders, and realized that his rival might have
touched them.</p>

<p>Conny went on talking for half an hour with
astonishing endurance and resourcefulness, but it
became always more apparent that he was not
captivating his audience. He had to laugh at his
own humour and expatiate on his own thrills.
Finally a silence fell upon the three, broken only
by occasional commonplace remarks.</p>

<p><q>Well, I guess it&rsquo;s time to drift,</q> Conny observed
at last, looking cautiously at his watch.</p>
<pb n="75"/><anchor id="Pg75"/>

<p>This suggestion was neither seconded by
Ramon nor opposed by Julia. The silence literally
pushed Conny to his feet.</p>

<p><q>Going, Ramon? No? Well, Good night.</q>
And he retired whistling in a way which showed
his irritation more plainly than if he had sworn.</p>

<p>The two impolite ones sat silent for a long
moment. Ramon was trying to think of what he
wanted to say and how he wanted to say it. Finally
without looking at her he said in a low husky
voice.</p>

<p><q>You know &hellip; I love you.</q></p>

<p>There was more silence. At last he looked up
and met her eyes. They were serious for the
first time in his experience, and so was her usually
mocking little mouth. Her face was transformed
and dignified. More than ever she
seemed a strange, high being. And yet he knew
that now she was within his reach.&hellip; That he
could kiss her lips &hellip; incredible.&hellip; And yet
he did, and the kiss poured flame over them and
welded them into each others&rsquo; arms.</p>

<p>They heard Gordon Roth in the house coughing,
the cough coming closer.</p>

<p>She pushed him gently away.</p>

<p><q>Go now,</q> she whispered. <q>I love you &hellip; Ramon.</q></p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC10" type="chapter">
<pb n="76"/><anchor id="Pg76"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER X</hi>
</head>

<p>His conquest was far from giving him peace.
Her kiss had transformed his high vague yearning
into hot relentless desire. He wanted her.
That became the one clear thing in life to him.
Reflections and doubts were alien to his young
and primitive spirit. He did not try to look far
into the future. He only knew that to have her
would be delight almost unimaginable and to lose
her would be to lose everything.</p>

<p>His attitude toward her changed. He claimed
her more and more at dances. She did not
want to dance with him so much because <q>people
would talk,</q> but his will was harder than hers
and to a great extent he had his way. He now
called on her regularly too. He knew that she
had fought hard for him against her family, and
had won the privilege for him of calling <q>not too
often.</q></p>

<p><q>I&rsquo;ve lied for you frightfully,</q> she confessed.
<q>I told them I didn&rsquo;t really care for you in the
least, but I want to see you because you can tell
such wonderful things about the country. So talk
about the country whenever they&rsquo;re listening.
And don&rsquo;t look at me the way you do.&hellip;</q></p>
<pb n="77"/><anchor id="Pg77"/>

<p>Mother and brother were alert and suspicious
despite her assurance, and man&oelig;uvred with cool
skill to keep the pair from being alone. Only
rarely did he get the chance to kiss her&mdash;once
when her brother, who was standing guard over
the family treasure, was seized with a fit of
coughing and had to leave the room, and again
when her mother was called to the telephone. At
such times she shrank away from him at first as
though frightened by the intensity of the emotion
she had created, but she never resisted. To him
these brief and stolen embraces were almost intolerably
sweet, like insufficient sips of water to
a man burned up with thirst.</p>

<p>She puzzled him as much as ever. When he
was with her he felt as sure of her love as of his
own existence. And yet she often sought to
elude him. When he called up for engagements
she objected and put him off. And she surrounded
herself with other men as much as ever, and
flirted gracefully with all of them, so that he was
always feeling the sharp physical pangs of
jealousy. Sometimes he felt egotistically sure
that she was merely trying by these devices to
provoke his desire the more, but at other times
he thought her voice over the phone sounded
doubtful and afraid, and he became wildly eager
to get to her and make sure of her again.</p>

<p>Just as her kiss had crystallized his feeling for
<pb n="78"/><anchor id="Pg78"/>
her into driving desire, so it had focussed and intensified
his discontent. Before he had been
more or less resigned to wait for his fortune and
the power he meant to make of it; now it seemed
to him that unless he could achieve these things
at once, they would never mean anything to him.
For money was the one thing that would give him
even a chance to win her. It was obviously useless
to ask her to marry him poor. He would
have nothing to bring against the certain opposition
of her family. He could not run away with
her. And indeed he was altogether too poor to
support a wife if he had one, least of all a wife
who had been carefully groomed and trained to
capture a fortune.</p>

<p>There was only one way. If he could go to
her strong and rich, he felt sure that he could
persuade her to go away with him, for he knew
that she belonged to him when he was with her.
He pictured himself going to her in a great motor
car. Such a car had always been in his imagination
the symbol of material strength. He felt
sure he could destroy her doubts and hesitations.
He would carry her away and she would be all
and irrevocably his before any one could interfere
or object.</p>

<p>This dream filled and tortured his imagination.
Its realization would mean not only fulfilment
of his desire, but also revenge upon the Roths for
<pb n="79"/><anchor id="Pg79"/>
the humiliations they had made him feel. It
pushed everything else out of his mind&mdash;all
consideration of other and possibly more feasible
methods of pushing his suit. He came of a race
of men who had dared and dominated, who had
loved and fought, but had never learned how to
work or to endure.</p>

<p>When he gave himself up to his dream he was
almost elated, but when he came to contemplate
his actual circumstances, he fell into depths of
discouragement and melancholy. His uncle stood
like a rock between him and his desire. He
thought of trying to borrow a few thousand dollars
from old Diego, and of leaving the future to luck,
but he was too intelligent long to entertain such a
scheme. The Don would likely have provided
him with the money, and he would have done it
by hypothecating more of the Delcasar lands to
MacDougall. Then Ramon would have had to
borrow more, and so on, until the lands upon which
all his hopes and dreams were based had passed
forever out of his reach.</p>

<p>The thing seemed hopeless, for Don Diego
might well live for many years. And yet Ramon
did not give up hope. He was worried, desperate
and bitter, but not beaten. He had still that
illogical faith in his own destiny which is the gift
that makes men of action.</p>

<p>At this time he heard particularly disquieting
<pb n="80"/><anchor id="Pg80"/>
things about his uncle. Don Diego was reputed
to be spending unusually large sums of money.
As he generally had not much ready cash, this
must mean either that he had sold land or that he
had borrowed from MacDougall, in which case
the land had doubtless been given as security.
Once it was converted into cash in the hands of
Diego, Ramon knew that his prospective fortune
would swiftly vanish. He determined to watch
the old man closely.</p>

<p>He learned that Don Diego was playing poker
every night in the back room of the White Camel
pool hall. Gambling was supposed to be prohibited
in the town, but this sanctum was regularly
the scene for a game, which had the reputation of
causing more money to change hands than any
other in the southwest. Ramon hung about the
White Camel evening after evening, trying to
learn how much his uncle was losing. He would
have liked to go and stand behind his chair and
watch the game, but both etiquette and pride
prevented him doing this. On two nights his
uncle came out surrounded by a laughing crowd,
a little bit tipsy, and was hurried into a cab.
Ramon had no chance to speak either to him or to
any one else who had been in the
game<corr sic=","><anchor id="E12"/><ref target="e12">.</ref></corr>
But the third night he came out alone, heavy with liquor,
talking to himself. The other players had already
gone out, laughing. The place was nearly
<pb n="81"/><anchor id="Pg81"/>
deserted. The Don suddenly caught sight of
Ramon and came to him, laying heavy hands on
his shoulders, looking at him with bleary, tear-filled
eyes.</p>

<p><q>My boy, my nephew,</q> he exclaimed in Spanish,
his voice shaking with boozy emotion, <q>I am glad
you are here. Come I must talk to you.</q> And
steadied by Ramon he led the way to a bench in a
corner. Here his manner suddenly changed. He
threw back his head haughtily and slapped his
knee.</p>

<p><q>I have lost five hundred dollars tonight,</q> he
announced proudly. <q>What do I care? I am a
rich man. I have lost a thousand dollars in the
last three nights. That is nothing. I am rich.</q></p>

<p>He thumped his chest, looking around defiantly.
Then he leaned forward in a confidential manner
and lowered his voice.</p>

<p><q>But these gringos&mdash;they have gone away and
left me. You saw them? <hi rend="font-style: italic">Cabrones!</hi> They
have got my money. That is all they want.
My boy, all gringos are alike. They want
nothing but money. They can hear the rattle of
a <hi rend="font-style: italic">peso</hi> as far as a
<hi rend="font-style: italic">burro</hi> can smell a bear. They
are mean, stingy! Ah, my boy! It is not now as
it was in the old days. Then money counted for
nothing! Then a man could throw away his last
dollar and there were always friends to give him
more. But now your dollars are your only true
<pb n="82"/><anchor id="Pg82"/>
friends, and when you have lost them, you are
alone indeed. Ah, my boy! The old days were
the best!</q> The old Don bent his head over his
hands and wept.</p>

<p>Ramon looked at him with a mighty disgust and
with a resentment that filled his throat and made
his head hot. He had never before realized how
much broken by age and drink his uncle was.
Before, he had suspected and feared that Don
Diego was wasting his property; now he knew it.</p>

<p>The Don presently looked up again with tear-filled
eyes, and went on talking, holding Ramon
by the lapel of the coat in a heavy tremulous grip.
He talked for almost an hour, his senile mind
wandering aimlessly through the scenes of his
long and picturesque career. He would tell tales
of his loves and battles of fifty years ago&mdash;tales
full of lust and greed and excitement. He would
come back to his immediate troubles and curse the
gringos again for a pack of miserable dollar-mongers,
who knew not the meaning of friendship.
And again his mind would leap back
irrelevantly to some woman he had loved or some
man he had killed in the spacious days where his
imagination dwelt. Ramon listened eagerly,
hoping to learn something definite about the
Don&rsquo;s dealings with MacDougall, but the old man
never touched upon this. He did tell one story to
which Ramon listened with interest. He told
<pb n="83"/><anchor id="Pg83"/>
how, twenty-five years before, he and another man
named Cristobal Archulera had found a silver
mine in the Guadelupe Mountains, and how he
had cheated the other out of his interest by filing
the claim in his own name. He told this as a
capital joke, laughing and thumping his knee.</p>

<p><q>Do you know where Archulera is now?</q>
Ramon ventured to ask.</p>

<p><q>Archulera? No, No; I have not seen
Archulera for twenty years. I heard that he
married a very common woman, half Indian.&hellip;
I don&rsquo;t know what became of him.</q></p>

<p>The last of the pool players had now gone out;
a Mexican boy had begun to sweep the floor; the
place was about to close for the night. Ramon
got his uncle to his feet with some difficulty, and
led him outdoors where he looked about in vain
for one of the cheap autos that served the town
as taxicabs. There were only three or four of
them, and none of these were in sight. The flat-wheeled
street car had made its last screeching
trip for the night. There was nothing for it
but to take the Don by the arm and pilot him
slowly homeward.</p>

<p>Refreshed by the night air, the old man partially
sobered, walked with a steady step, and
talked more eloquently and profusely than ever.
Women were his subject now, and it was a subject
upon which he had great store of material. He
<pb n="84"/><anchor id="Pg84"/>
told of the women of the South, of Sonora and
Chihuahua where he had spent much of his youth,
of how beautiful they were. He told of a slim
little creature fifteen years old with big black eyes
whom he had bought from her <hi rend="font-style: italic">peon</hi>
father, and of how she had feared him and how he had conquered
her and her fear. He told of slave girls
he had bought from the Navajos as children and
raised for his pleasure. He told of a French
woman he had loved in Mexico City and how he
had fought a duel with her husband. He rose to
heights of sentimentality and delved into depths
of obscenity, now speaking  of his
heart and what it had suffered, and again leering
and chuckling like a satyr over some tale of splendid
desire.</p>

<p>Ramon, walking silent and outwardly respectful
by his side, listened to all this with a strange
mixture of envy and rage. He envied the old
Don the rich share he had taken of life&rsquo;s feast.
Whatever else he might be the Don was not one
of those who desire but do not dare. He had
taken what he wanted. He had tasted many
emotions and known the most poignant delights.
And now that he was old and his blood was slow,
he stood in the way of others who desired as
greatly and were as avid of life as ever he had
been. Ramon felt a great bitterness that clutched
at his throat and half blinded his eyes. He too
<pb n="85"/><anchor id="Pg85"/>
loved and desired. And how much more greatly
he desired than ever had this old man by his side,
with his wealth and his easy satisfactions! The
old Don apparently had never been thwarted,
and therefore he did not know how keen and
punishing a blade desire may be!</p>

<p>Tense between the two was the enmity that
ever sunders age and youth&mdash;age seeking to keep
its sovereignty of life by inculcating blind respect
and reverence, and youth rebellious, demanding
its own with the passion of hot blood and untried
flesh.</p>

<p>Between Old Town and New Town flowed an
irrigating ditch, which the connecting street
crossed by means of an old wooden bridge. The
ditch was this night full of swift water, which
tore at the button willows on the bank and gurgled
against the bridge timbers. As they crossed
it the idea came into Ramon&rsquo;s head that if a man
were pushed into the brown water he would be
swiftly carried under the bridge and drowned.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC11" type="chapter">
<pb n="86"/><anchor id="Pg86"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER XI</hi>
</head>

<p>The following Saturday evening Ramon was
again riding across the <hi rend="font-style: italic">mesa</hi>,
clad in his dirty hunting clothes, with his shotgun hung in the
cinches of his saddle. At the start he had been
undecided where he was going. Tormented by
desire and bitter over the poverty which stood
between him and fulfilment, he had flung the
saddle on his mare and ridden away, feeling none
of the old interest in the mountains, but impelled
by a great need to escape the town with all its
cruel spurs and resistances.</p>

<p>Already the rhythm of his pony&rsquo;s lope and the
steady beat of the breeze in his face had calmed
and refreshed him. The bitter, exhausting
thoughts that had been plucking at his mind gave
way to the idle procession of sensations, as they
tend always to do when a man escapes the artificial
existence of towns into the natural, animal
one of the outdoors. He began to respond to
the deep appeal which the road, the sense of
going somewhere, always had for him. For he
came of a race of wanderers. His forbears had
been restless men to cross an ocean and most of
<pb n="87"/><anchor id="Pg87"/>
a continent in search of homes. He was bred to
a life of wandering and adventure. Long pent-up
days in town always made him restless, and
the feel of a horse under him and of distance to
be overcome never failed to give him a sense of
well-being.</p>

<p>Crossing a little <hi rend="font-style: italic">arroyo</hi>,
he saw a covey of the
blue desert quail with their white crests erect,
darting among the rocks and cactus on the hillside.
It was still the close season, but he never
thought of that. In an instant he was all hunter,
like a good dog in sight of game. He slipped
from his horse, letting the reins fall to the ground,
and went running up the rocky slope, cleverly
using every bit of cover until he came within
range. At the first shot he killed three of the
birds, and got another as they rose and whirred
over the hill top. He gathered them up quickly,
stepping on the head of a wounded one, and
stuffed them into his pockets. He was grinning,
now, and happy. The bit of excitement had
washed from his mind for the time being the last
vestige of worry. He lit a cigarette and lay on
his back to smoke it, stretching out his legs luxuriously,
watching the serene gyrations of a buzzard.
When he had extracted the last possible
puff from the tobacco, he went back to his horse
and rode on toward Archulera&rsquo;s ranch, feeling a
<pb n="88"/><anchor id="Pg88"/>
keen interest in the coarse but substantial supper
which he knew the old man would give him.</p>

<p>His visit this time proceeded just as had all of
the others, and he had never enjoyed one more
thoroughly. Again the old man killed a fatted
kid in his honour, and again they had a great feast
of fresh brains and tripe and biscuits and coffee,
with the birds, fried in deep lard, as an added
luxury. Catalina served them in silence as usual,
but stole now and then a quick reproachful look
at Ramon. Afterward, when the girl had gone,
there were many cigarettes and much talk, as
before, Archulera telling over again the brave
wild record of his youth. And, as always, he
told, just as though he had never told it before,
the story of how Diego Delcasar had cheated
him out of his interest in a silver mine in the
Guadelupe Mountains. As with each former
telling he became this time more unrestrained in
his denunciation of the man who had betrayed
him.</p>

<p><q>You are not like him,</q> he assured Ramon
with passionate earnestness. <q>You are generous,
honourable! When your uncle is dead&mdash;when he
is dead, I say&mdash;you will pay me the five thousand
dollars which your family owes to mine. Am I
right, <hi rend="font-style: italic">amigo?</hi></q></p>

<p>Ramon, who was listening with only half an ear,
was about to make some off-hand reply, as he had
<pb n="89"/><anchor id="Pg89"/>
always done before. But suddenly a strange,
stirring idea flashed through his brain. Could it
be? Could that be what Archulera meant? He
glanced at the man. Archulera was watching
him with bright black eyes&mdash;cunning, feral&mdash;the
eyes of a primitive fighting man, eyes that had
never flinched at dealing death.</p>

<p>Ramon knew suddenly that his idea was right.
Blood pounded in his temples and a red mist of
excitement swam before his eyes.</p>

<p><q>Yes!</q> he exclaimed, leaping to his feet.
<q>Yes! When my uncle is dead I will pay you the
five thousand dollars which the estate owes you!</q></p>

<p>The old man studied him, showing no trace of
excitement save for the brightness of his eyes.</p>

<p><q>You swear this?</q> he demanded.</p>

<p>Ramon stood tall, his head lifted, his eyes
bright.</p>

<p><q>Yes; I swear it,</q> he replied, more quietly
now. <q>I swear it on my honour as a Delcasar!</q></p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC12" type="chapter">
<pb n="90"/><anchor id="Pg90"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER XII</hi>
</head>

<p>The murder of Don Diego Delcasar, which occurred
about three weeks later, provided the
town with an excitement which it thoroughly enjoyed.
Although there was really not a great
deal to be said about the affair, since it remained
from the first a complete mystery, the local papers
devoted a great deal of space to it. The
<hi rend="font-style: italic">Evening
Journal</hi> announced the event in a great black
headline which ran all the way across the top of
the first page. The right-hand column was devoted
to a detailed description of the scene of the
crime, while the rest of the page was occupied by
a picture of the Don, by a hastily written and
highly inaccurate account of his career, and by
statements from prominent citizens concerning
the great loss which the state had suffered in the
death of this, one of its oldest and most valued
citizens.</p>

<p>In the editorial columns the Don was described
as a Spanish gentleman of the old school, and one
who had always lived up to its highest traditions.
The fact was especially emphasized that he had
commanded the respect and confidence of both
<pb n="91"/><anchor id="Pg91"/>
the races which made up the population of the
state, and his long and honourable association in a
business enterprise with a leading local attorney
was cited as proof of the fact that he had been
above all race antagonisms.</p>

<p>The morning <hi rend="font-style: italic">Herald</hi>
took a slightly different
tack. Its editorial writer was a former New
York newspaperman of unusual abilities who had
been driven to the Southwest by tuberculosis. In
an editorial which was deplored by many prominent
business men, he pointed out that unpunished
murderers were all too common in the State.
He cited several cases like this of Don Delcasar
in which prominent men had been assassinated,
and no arrest had followed. Thus, only a few
years before, Col. Manuel Escudero had been
killed by a shot fired through the window of a
saloon, and still more recently Don Solomon
Estrella had been found drowned in a vat of
sheep-dip on his own ranch. He cited statistics
to show that the percentage of convictions in
murder trials in that State was exceedingly small.
Daringly, he asked how the citizens could expect
to attract to the State the capital so much needed
for its development, when assassination for personal
and political purposes was there tolerated
much as it had been in Europe during the Middle
Ages. He ended by a plea that the Mounted
<pb n="92"/><anchor id="Pg92"/>
Police should be strengthened, so that it would be
capable of coping with the situation.</p>

<p>This editorial started a controversy between
the two papers which ultimately quite eclipsed in
interest the fact that Don Delcasar was dead.
The <hi rend="font-style: italic">Morning Journal</hi>
declared that the <hi rend="font-style: italic">Herald</hi>
editorial was in effect a covert attack upon the
Mexican people, pointing out that all the cases
cited were those of Mexicans, and it came gallantly
and for political reason to the defence of
the race. At this point the
<hi rend="font-style: italic"><q>Tribuna del Pueblo</q></hi>
of Old Town jumped into the fight with an editorial
in which it was asserted that both the gringo
papers were maligning the Mexican people. It
pointed out that the gringos controlled the political
machinery of the State, and that if murder was
there tolerated the dominant race was to blame.</p>

<p>Meanwhile the known facts about the murder
of Don Delcasar remained few, simple and unilluminating.
About once a month the Don used
to drive in his automobile to his lands in the
northern part of the State. He always took the
road across the <hi rend="font-style: italic">mesa</hi>, which
passed near the mouth of Domingo Canyon and through the scissors
pass, and he nearly always went alone.</p>

<p>When he was half way across the
<hi rend="font-style: italic">mesa</hi>, the
front tires of the Don&rsquo;s car had been punctured
by nails driven through a board and hidden in
the sand of the road. Evidently the Don had
<pb n="93"/><anchor id="Pg93"/>
risen to alight and investigate when he had been
shot, for his body had been found hanging across
the wind-shield of the car with a bullet hole
through the head.</p>

<p>The discovery of the body had been made by a
Mexican woodcutter who was on the way to town
with a load of wood. He had of course been
held by the police and had been closely questioned,
but it was easily established that he had no connection
with the crime.</p>

<p>It was evident that the Don had been shot
from ambush with a rifle, and probably from a
considerable distance, but absolutely no trace of
the assassin had been found. Not only the chief
of police and several patrolmen, and the sheriff
with a posse, but also many private citizens in
automobiles had rushed to the scene of the crime
and joined in the search. The surrounding
country was dry and rocky. Not even a track
had been found.</p>

<p>The motive of the murder was evidently not
robbery, for nothing had been taken, although
the Don carried a valuable watch and a considerable
sum of money. Indeed, there was no evidence
that the murderer had even approached the
body.</p>

<p>The Don had been a staunch Republican,
and the <hi rend="font-style: italic">Morning Herald</hi>,
also Republican, advanced
the theory that he had been killed by
<pb n="94"/><anchor id="Pg94"/>
political enemies. This theory was ridiculed by
the <hi rend="font-style: italic">Evening Journal</hi>,
which was Democratic.</p>

<p>The local police arrested as a suspect a man
who was found in hiding near a water tank at
the railroad station, but no evidence against him
could be found and he had to be released. The
sheriff extracted a confession of guilt from a
sheep herder who was found about ten miles
from the scene of the crime, but it was subsequently
proved by this man&rsquo;s relatives that he
was at home and asleep at the time the crime was
committed, and that he was well known to be of
unsound mind. For some days the newspapers
continued daily to record the fact that a <q>diligent
search</q> for the murderer was being conducted,
but this search gradually came to an end along
with public interest in the crime.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC13" type="chapter">
<pb n="95"/><anchor id="Pg95"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER XIII</hi>
</head>

<p>The day after the news of his uncle&rsquo;s murder
reached him, Ramon lay on his bed in his darkened
room fully dressed in a new suit of black. He
was not ill, and anything would have been easier
for him than to lie there with nothing to do but
to think and to stare at a single narrow sunbeam
which came through a rent in the window blind.
But it was a Mexican custom, old and revered,
for the family of one recently dead to lie upon
its beds in the dark and so to receive the condolences
of friends and the consolations of religion.
To disregard this custom would have
been most unwise for an ambitious young man,
and besides, Ramon&rsquo;s mother clung tenaciously to
the traditional Mexican ways, and she would not
have tolerated any breach of them. At this
moment she and her two daughters were likewise
lying in their rooms, clad in new black silk and
surrounded by other sorrowing females.</p>

<p>It was so still in the room that Ramon could
hear the buzz of a fly in the vicinity of the solitary
sunbeam, but from other parts of the house came
occasional human sounds. One of these was an
<pb n="96"/><anchor id="Pg96"/>
intermittent howling and wailing from the
<hi rend="font-style: italic">placita</hi>.
This he knew was the work of two old Mexican
women who made their livings by acting as professional
mourners. They did not wait for an invitation
but hung about like buzzards wherever there
was a Mexican corpse. Seated on the ground with
their black shawls pulled over their heads, they
wailed with astonishing endurance until the coffin
was carried from the house, when they were sure
of receiving a substantial gift from the grateful
relatives. Ramon resolved that he would give
them ten dollars each. He felt sure they had
never gotten so much. He was determined to do
handsomely in all things connected with the
funeral.</p>

<p>He could also hear faintly a rattle of wagons,
foot steps and low human voices coming from the
front of the house. A peep had shown him that
already a line of wagons, carriages and buggies
half a block long had formed in the street, and he
could hear the arrival of another one every few
minutes. These vehicles brought the numerous
and poor relations of Don Delcasar who lived in
the country. All of them would be there by
night. Each one of them would come into Ramon&rsquo;s
room and sit by his bedside and take his hand
and express sympathy. Some of them would
weep and some would groan, although all of
<pb n="97"/><anchor id="Pg97"/>
them, like himself, were profoundly glad that the
Don was dead. Ramon hoped that they would
make their expressions brief. And later, he
knew, all would gather in the room where the
casket rested on two chairs. They would sit in a
silent solemn circle about the room, drinking
coffee and wine all night. And he would be
among them, trying with all his might to look
properly sad and to keep his eyes open.</p>

<p>All the time that he lay there in enforced idleness
he was longing for action, his imagination
straining forward. At last his chance had come&mdash;his
chance to have her. And he would
have her. He felt sure of it. He was now a
rich man. As soon as the will had been read and
he had come into his own, he would buy a big
automobile. He would go to her, he would
sweep away her doubts and hesitations. He
would carry her away and marry her. She
would be his.&hellip; He closed his eyes and drew
his breath in sharply.&hellip;</p>

<p>But no; he would have to wait &hellip; a decent interval.
And the five thousand dollars must be
gotten to Archulera. That was obviously important.
And there might not be much cash. The
Don had never had much ready money. He
might have to sell land or sheep first. All of
these things to be done, and here he lay, staring
<pb n="98"/><anchor id="Pg98"/>
at the ceiling and listening to the wailing of old
women!</p>

<p>There was a knock on the door.</p>

<p><q><hi rend="font-style: italic">Entra!</hi></q> he called.</p>

<p>The door opened softly and a tall, black-robed
figure was silhouetted for a moment against the
daylight before the door closed again. The
black figure crossed the room and sat down by
the bed, silent save for a faint rustle.</p>

<p>Although he could not see the face, Ramon
knew that this was the priest, Father Lugaria.
He knew that Father Lugaria had come to arrange
for the mass over the body of Don Delcasar.
He disliked Father Lugaria, and knew that
the Father disliked him. This mutual antipathy
was due to the fact that Ramon seldom went to
Church.</p>

<p>There were others of his generation who
showed the same indifference toward religion, and
this defection of youth was a thing which the
Priests bitterly contested. Ramon was perfectly
willing to make a polite compromise with them.
If Father Lugaria had been satisfied with an occasional
appearance at early mass, a perfunctory
confession now and then, the two might have been
friends. But the Priest made Ramon a special
object of his attention. He continually went to
the Dona Delcasar with complaints and that devout
woman incessantly nagged her son, holding
<pb n="99"/><anchor id="Pg99"/>
before him always pictures of the damnation he
was courting. Once in a while she even produced
in him a faint twinge of fear&mdash;a recrudescence
of the deep religious feeling in which he was bred&mdash;but
the feeling was evanescent. The chief
result of these labours on behalf of his soul had
been to turn him strongly against the priest who
instigated them.</p>

<p>Father Lugaria seemed all kindness and sympathy
now. He sat close beside Ramon and
took his hand. Ramon could smell the good
wine on the man&rsquo;s breath, and could see faintly
the brightness of his eyes. The grip of the
priest&rsquo;s hand was strong, moist and surprisingly
cold. He began to talk in the low monotonous
voice of one accustomed to much chanting, and
this droning seemed to have some hypnotic quality.
It seemed to lull Ramon&rsquo;s mind so that he
could not think what he was going to say or do.</p>

<p>The priest expressed his sympathy. He spoke
of the great and good man the Don had been.
Slowly, adroitly, he approached the real question
at issue, which was how much Ramon would pay
for a mass. The more he paid, the longer the
mass would be, and the longer the mass the speedier
would be the journey of the Don&rsquo;s soul
through purgatory and into Paradise.</p>

<p><q>O, my little brother in Christ!</q> droned the
priest in his vibrant sing-song, <q rend="post: none">I must not let you
<pb n="100"/><anchor id="Pg100"/>
neglect this last, this greatest of things which you
can do for the uncle you loved. It is unthinkable
of course that his soul should go to hell&mdash;hell,
where a thousand demons torture the soul for an
eternity. Hell is for those who commit the
worst of sins, sins they dare not lay before God
for his forgiveness, secret and terrible sins&mdash;sins
like murder. But few of us go through life
untouched by sin. The soul must be purified before
it can enter the presence of its maker.&hellip;
Doubtless the soul of your uncle is in purgatory,
and to you is given the sweet power to speed that
soul on its upward way.&hellip;
</q></p>

<p><q>Don Delcasar, we all know, killed.&hellip;
More than once, doubtless, he took the life of a
fellow man. But he did it in combat as a soldier,
as a servant of the State.&hellip; That is not murder.
That would not doom him to hell, which is
the special punishment of secret and unforgiven
murder.&hellip; But the soul of the Don must be
cleansed of these earthly stains.&hellip;</q></p>

<p>The strong, cold grip of the priest held Ramon
with increasing power. The monotonous, hypnotic
voice went on and on, becoming ever more
eloquent and confident. Father Lugaria was a
man of imagination, and the special home of his
imagination was hell. For thirty years he had
held despotic sway over the poor Mexicans who
made up most of his flock, and had gathered
<pb n="101"/><anchor id="Pg101"/>
much money for the Church, by painting word-pictures
of hell. He was a veritable artist of
hell. He loved hell. Again and again he digressed
from the strict line of his argument to
speak of hell. With all the vividness of a thing
seen, he described its flames, its fiends, the terrible
stink of burning flesh and the vast chorus of
agony that filled it.&hellip; And for some obscure
reason or purpose he always spoke of hell as the
special punishment of murderers. Again and
again in his discourse he coupled murder and hell.</p>

<p>Ramon was wearied by strong emotions and a
shortness of sleep. His nerves were overstrung.
This ceaseless iteration of hell and murder,
murder and hell would drive him crazy, he
thought. He wished mightily that the priest
would have done and name his price and go.
What was the sense and purpose of this endless
babble about hell and murder?&hellip; A sickening
thought struck him like a blow, leaving him weak.
What if old Archulera had confessed to the
priest?</p>

<p>Well; what if he had? A priest could not
testify about what he had heard in confessional.
But a priest might tell some one else.&hellip; O, God!
If the man would only go and leave him to think.
Hell and murder, murder and hell. The two
words beat upon his brain without mercy. He
longed to interrupt the priest and beg him to
<pb n="102"/><anchor id="Pg102"/>
leave off. But for some reason he could not.
He could not even turn his head and look at the
man. The priest was but a clammy grip that held
him and a disembodied voice that spoke of hell
and murder. Had he done murder? And was
there a hell? He had long ceased to believe in
hell, but hell had been real to him as a child. His
mother and his nurse had filled him with the fear
of hell. He had been bred in the fear of hell. It
was in his flesh and bones if not in his mind, and
the priest had hypnotized his mind. Hell was
real to him again. Fear of hell came up from the
past which vanishes but is never gone, and gripped
him like a great ugly monster. It squeezed a
cold sweat out of his body and made his skin
prickle and his breath come short.&hellip;</p>

<p>The priest dropped the subject of hell, and
spoke again of the mass. He mentioned a sum of
money. Ramon nodded his head muttering his
assent like a sick man. The grip on his hand
relaxed.</p>

<p><q>Good-bye, my little brother,</q> murmured the
priest. <q>May Christ be always with you.</q> His
gown rustled across the room and as he opened
the door, Ramon saw his face for a moment&mdash;a
sallow, shrewd face, bedewed with the sweat of a
great effort, but wearing a smile of triumphant
satisfaction.</p>

<p>Ramon lay sick and exhausted. It seemed to
<pb n="103"/><anchor id="Pg103"/>
him that there was no air in the room. He was
suffocating. His body burned and prickled. He
rose and tore loose his collar. He must get out
of this place, must have air and movement.</p>

<p>It was dusk now. The wailing of the old
women had ceased. Doubtless they were being
rewarded with supper. He began stripping off
his clothes&mdash;his white shirt and his new suit of
black. Eagerly rummaging in the closet he found
his old clothes, which he wore on his trips to the
mountains.</p>

<p>In the dim light he slipped out of the house,
indistinguishable from any Mexican boy that
might have been about the place. He saddled
the little mare in the corral, mounted and galloped
away&mdash;through Old Town, where skinny dogs
roamed in dark narrow streets and men and
women sat and smoked in black doorways&mdash;and
out upon the valley road. There he spurred his
mare without mercy, and they flew over the soft
dust. The rush of the air in his face, and the thud
and quiver of living flesh under him were infinitely
sweet.</p>

<p>He stopped at last five miles from town on the
bank of the river. It was a swift muddy river,
wandering about in a flood plain a quarter of a
mile wide, and at this point chewing noisily at a
low bank forested with scrubby cottonwoods.</p>

<p>Dismounting, he stripped and plunged into the
<pb n="104"/><anchor id="Pg104"/>
river. It was only three feet deep, but he wallowed
about in it luxuriously, finding great
comfort in the caress of the cool water, and of
the soft fine sand upon the bottom which clung
about his toes and tickled the soles of his feet.
Then he climbed out on the bank and stood where
the breeze struck him, rubbing the water off of his
slim strong body with the flats of his hands.</p>

<p>When he had put on his clothes, he indulged
his love of lying flat on the ground, puffing a
cigarette and blowing smoke at the first stars.
A hunting owl flitted over his head on muffled
wing; a coyote yapped in the bushes; high up in
the darkness he heard the whistle of pinions as
a flock of early ducks went by.</p>

<p>He took the air deeply into his lungs and
stretched out his legs. In this place fear of hell
departed from his mind as some strong liquors
evaporate when exposed to the open air. The
splendid healthy animal in him was again dominant,
and it could scarcely conceive of death and
had nothing more to do with hell than had the
owl and the coyote that killed to live. Here he
felt at peace with the earth beneath him and the
sky above. But one thought came to disturb him
and it was also sweet&mdash;the thought of a woman,
her eyes full of promise, the curve of her mouth.&hellip;
She was waiting for him, she would be his.
That was real.&hellip; Hell was a dream.</p>
<pb n="105"/><anchor id="Pg105"/>

<p>He saw now the folly of his fears about
Archulera, too. Archulera never went to church.
There was no danger that he would ever confess
to any one. And even if he did, he could scarcely
injure Ramon. For Ramon had done no wrong.
He had but promised an old man his due, righted
an ancient wrong.&hellip; He smiled.</p>

<p>Slowly he mounted and rode home, filled with
thoughts of the girl, to put on his mourning
clothes and take his decorous place in the circle
that watched his uncle&rsquo;s bier.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC14" type="chapter">
<pb n="106"/><anchor id="Pg106"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER XIV</hi>
</head>

<p>All the ceremonies and procedures, religious
and legal, which had been made necessary by the
death of Don Diego Delcasar, were done. The
body of the Don had been taken to the church in
Old Town and placed before the altar, the casket
covered with black cloth and surrounded by
candles in tall silver candlesticks which stood upon
the floor. A Mass of impressive length had been
spoken over it by Father Lugaria assisted by
numerous priests and altar boys, and at the end of
the ceremony the hundreds of friends and relatives
of the Don, who filled the church, had
lifted up their voices in one of the loudest and
most prolonged choruses of wailing ever heard in
that country, where wailing at a funeral is as much
a matter of formal custom as is cheering at a
political convention. Afterwards a cortege nearly
a mile in length, headed by a long string of carriages
and tailed by a crowd of poor Mexicans
trudging hatless in the dust, had made the hot
and wearisome journey to the cemetery in the
sandhills.</p>

<p>Then the will had been read and had revealed
that Ramon Delcasar was heir to the bulk of his
<pb n="107"/><anchor id="Pg107"/>
uncle&rsquo;s estate, and that he was thereby placed in
possession of money, lands and sheep to the value
of about two hundred thousand dollars. It was
said by those who knew that the Don&rsquo;s estate had
once been at least twice that large, and there were
some who irreverently remarked that he had been
taken off none too soon for the best interests of
his heirs.</p>

<p>Shortly after the reading of the will, Ramon
rode to the Archulera ranch, starting before daylight
and returning after dark. He exchanged
greetings with the old man, just as he had always
done.</p>

<p><q>Accept my sympathy,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">amigo</hi>,</q> Archulera said
in his formal, polite way, <q>that you have lost your
uncle, the head of your great family.</q></p>

<p><q>I thank you, friend,</q> Ramon replied. <q>A
man must bear these things. Here is something I
promised you,</q> he added, laying a small heavy
canvas bag upon the table, just as he had always
laid a package of tobacco or some other small
gift.</p>

<p>Old Archulera nodded without looking at the
bag.</p>

<p><q>Thank you,</q> he said.</p>

<p>Afterward they talked about the bean crop and
the weather, and had an excellent dinner of goat
meat cooked with chile.</p>

<p>In town Ramon found himself a person of noticeably
<pb n="108"/><anchor id="Pg108"/>
increased importance. One of his first
acts had been to buy a car, and he had attracted
much attention while driving this about the
streets, learning to manipulate it. He killed one
chicken and two dogs and handsomely reimbursed
their owners. These minor accidents were due
to his tendency, the result of many years of horsemanship,
to throw his weight back on the steering
wheel and shout <q>whoa!</q> whenever a sudden emergency
occurred. But he was apt, and soon was
running his car like an expert.</p>

<p>His personal appearance underwent a change
too. He had long cherished a barbaric leaning
toward finery, which lack of money had prevented
him from indulging. Large diamonds fascinated
him, and a leopard skin vest was a thing he had
always wanted to own. But these weaknesses he
now rigorously suppressed. Instead he noted
carefully the dress of Gordon Roth and of other
easterners whom he saw about the hotel, and
ordered from the best local tailor a suit of quiet
colour and conservative cut, but of the very best
English material. He bought no jewelry except a
single small pearl for his necktie. His hat, his
shoes, the way he had his neck shaved, all were
changed as the result of a painstaking observation
such as he had never practised before. He
wanted to make himself as much as possible like
the men of Julia&rsquo;s kind and class. And this desire
<pb n="109"/><anchor id="Pg109"/>
modified his manner and speech as well as his
appearance. He was careful, always watching
himself. His manner was more reserved and
quiet than ever, and this made him appear older
and more serious. He smiled when he overheard
a woman say that <q>he took the death of his uncle
much harder than she would have expected.</q></p>

<p>Ramon now received business propositions
every day. Men tried to sell him all sorts of
things, from an idea to a ranch, and most of them
seemed to proceed on the assumption that, being
young and newly come into his money, he should
part with it easily. Several of the opportunities
offered him had to do with the separation of the
poor Mexicans from their land holdings. A
prominent attorney came all the way from a town
in the northern part of the State to lay before
him a proposition of this kind. This lawyer,
named Cooley, explained that by opening a store
in a certain rich section of valley land, opportunities
could be created for lending the Mexicans
money. Whenever there was a birth, a funeral
or a marriage among them, the Mexicans needed
money, and could be persuaded to sign mortgages,
which they generally could not read. In each
Mexican family there would be either a birth, a
marriage or a death once in three years on an
average. Three such events would enable the
lender to gain possession of a ranch. And Cooley
<pb n="110"/><anchor id="Pg110"/>
had an eastern client who would then buy the land
at a good figure. It was a chance for Ramon to
double his money.</p>

<p><q>You&rsquo;ve got the money and you know the native
people,</q> Cooley argued earnestly. <q>I&rsquo;ve got the
sucker and I know the law. It&rsquo;s a sure thing.</q></p>

<p>Ramon thanked him politely and refused firmly.
The idea of robbing a poor Mexican of his ranch
by nine years of usury did not appeal to him at all.
In the first place, it would be a long, slow tedious
job, and besides, poor people always aroused his
pity, just as rich ones stirred his greed and envy.
He was predatory, but lion-like, he scorned to
spring on small game. He did not realize that a
lion often starves where a jackal grows fat.</p>

<p>Only one opportunity came to him which interested
him strongly. A young Irishman named
Hurley explained to him that it was possible to
buy mules in Mexico, where a revolution was going
on, for ten dollars each at considerable personal
risk, to run them across the Rio Grande and to
sell them to the United States army for twenty
dollars. Here was a gambler&rsquo;s chance, action and
adventure. It caught his fancy and tempted him.
But he had no thought of yielding. Another
purpose engrossed him.</p>

<p>These weeks after his uncle&rsquo;s funeral gave him
his first real grapple with the world of business,
and the experience tended to strengthen him in a
<pb n="111"/><anchor id="Pg111"/>
certain cynical self-assurance which had been
growing in him ever since he first went away to
college, and had met its first test in action
when he spoke the words that lead to the Don&rsquo;s
death. He felt a deep contempt for most of
these men who came to him with their schemes
and their wares. He saw that most of them were
ready enough to swindle him, though few of them
would have had the courage to rob him with a gun.
Probably not one of them would have dared to kill
a man for money, but they were ready enough to
cheat a poor <hi rend="font-style: italic">pelado</hi>
out of his living, which often
came to the same thing. He felt that he was
bigger than most of them, if not better. His self-respect
was strengthened.</p>

<p><q>Life is a fight,</q> he told himself, feeling that he
had hit upon a profound and original idea.
<q>Every man wants pretty women and money.
He gets them if he has enough nerve and enough
sense. And somebody else gets hurt, because
there aren&rsquo;t enough pretty women and money to
go around.</q></p>

<p>It seemed to him that this was the essence of
all wisdom.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC15" type="chapter">
<pb n="112"/><anchor id="Pg112"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER XV</hi>
</head>

<p>Ramon had always been rather a solitary figure
in his own town. Although he belonged nominally
to the <q>bunch</q> of young gringos, Jews and
Mexicans, who foregathered at the White Camel
Pool Hall, their amusements did not hold his
interest very strongly. They played a picayune
game of poker, which resulted in a tangled mass
of debt; they went on occasional mild sprees, and
on Saturday nights they
<corr sic="visted"><anchor id="E7"/>
<ref target="e7">visited</ref></corr>
the town&rsquo;s red light
district, hardy survivor of several vice crusades,
where they danced with portly magdalenes in
gaudy kimonos to the music of a mechanical piano,
luxuriating in conscious wickedness.</p>

<p>All of this had seemed romantic and delightfully
vicious to Ramon a few years before, but it
soon palled on his restless and discontented spirit.
He had formed the habit of hunting alone, and
had found adventures more to his taste. But now
he found himself in company more than ever
before. He was bid to every frolic that took
place. In the White Camel he was often the
centre of a small group, which included men older
than himself who had never paid any attention
<pb n="113"/><anchor id="Pg113"/>
to him before, but now addressed him with a
certain deference. Although he understood well
enough that most of the attentions paid him had
an interested motive, he enjoyed the sense of
leadership which these gatherings gave him. If
he was not a real leader now, he intended to become
one. He listened to what men said, watched
them, and said little himself. He was quick to
grasp the fact that a reputation for shrewdness
and wisdom is made by the simple method of keeping
the mouth shut.</p>

<p>He made many acquaintances among the new
element which had recently come to town from the
East in search of health or money, but he made no
real friends because none of these men inspired
him with respect. Only one man he attached to
himself, and that one by the simple tie of money.
His name was Antonio Cortez. He was a small,
skinny, sallow Mexican with a great moustache,
behind which he seemed to be discreetly hiding,
and a consciously cunning eye. Of an old and
once wealthy Spanish family, he had lost all of his
money by reason of a lack of aptitude for business,
and made his living as a sort of professional
political henchman. He was a bearer of secret
messages, a maker of deals, an eavesdropper.
The Latin aptitude for intrigue he had in a high
degree. He was capable of almost anything in
<pb n="114"/><anchor id="Pg114"/>
the way of falsehood or evasion, but he had that
great capacity for loyalty which is so often the
virtue of weaklings.</p>

<p><q>I have known your family for many years,</q>
he told Ramon importantly, <q>And I feel an
interest in you, almost as though you were my
own son. You need an older friend to advise
you, to attend to details in the management of
your great estate. You will probably go into
politics and you need a political manager. As an
old friend of your family I want to do these
things for you. What do you say?</q></p>

<p>Ramon answered without any hesitation and
prompted solely by intuition:</p>

<p><q>I thank you, friend, and I accept your offer.</q></p>

<p>He knew instinctively that he could trust this
man and also dominate him. It was just such a
follower that he needed. Nothing was said
about money, but on the first of the month Ramon
mailed Cortez a check for a hundred dollars,
and that became his regular salary.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC16" type="chapter">
<pb n="115"/><anchor id="Pg115"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER XVI</hi>
</head>

<p>About two weeks after the Don&rsquo;s funeral,
Ramon received a summons which he had been
vaguely expecting. He was asked by Mr. MacDougall&rsquo;s
secretary over the telephone to call,
whenever it would be convenient, at Mr. MacDougall&rsquo;s
office.</p>

<p>He knew just what this meant. MacDougall
would try to make with him an arrangement
somewhat similar to the one he had had with the
Don. Ramon knew that he did not want such an
arrangement on any terms. He felt confident
that not one could swindle him, but at the same
time he was half afraid of the Scotchman; he felt
instinctively that MacDougall was a man for him
to avoid. And besides, he intended to use his
lands in his own way. He would sell part of
them to the railroad, which was projected to be
built through them, if he could get a good price;
but the hunger for owning land, for dominating a
part of the earth, was as much a part of him as his
right hand. He wanted no modern business
partnership. He wanted to be <hi rend="font-style: italic"><q>el
patron,</q></hi> as so
many Delcasars had been before him.</p>

<p>Here was a temptation to be dramatic, to hurl
<pb n="116"/><anchor id="Pg116"/>
a picturesque defiance at the gringo. Ramon
might have yielded to it a few months before.
Sundry brave speeches flashed through his mind,
as it was. But he resolutely put them aside.
There was too much at stake &hellip; his love. He
determined to call on MacDougall promptly and
to be polite.</p>

<p>MacDougall was a heavy, bald man of Scotch
descent, and very true to type. He had come to
town from the East about fifteen years before
with his wife and his two tall, raw-boned children&mdash;a
boy and a girl. The family had been
very poor. They had lived in a small
<hi rend="font-style: italic">adobe</hi>
house on the <hi rend="font-style: italic">mesa</hi>.
For ten years Mrs. MacDougall
had done all of her own housework, including
the washing; the two children had gone to
school in clothes that seemed always too small for
them; and MacDougall had laboured obscurely
day and night in a small dark office. During
these ten years the MacDougalls had been completely
overlooked by local society, and if they
felt any resentment they did not show it.</p>

<p>Meantime MacDougall had been systematically
and laboriously laying the foundations of a
fortune. His passion was for land. He loaned
money on land, chiefly to Mexicans, and he took
mortgages on land in return for defending his
Mexican clients, largely on criminal charges.
Some of the land he farmed, and some he rented,
<pb n="117"/><anchor id="Pg117"/>
but much of it lay idle, and the taxes he had to
pay kept his family poor long after it might have
been comfortable. But his lands rose steadily in
value; he began selling, discreetly; and the MacDougalls
came magnificently into their own.
MacDougall was now one of the wealthiest men
in the State. In five years his way of living had
undergone a great change. He owned a large
brick house in the highlands and had several servants.
The boy had gone to Harvard, and the
girl to Vassar. Neither of them was so gawky
now, and both of them were much sought socially
during their vacations at home. MacDougall
himself had undergone a marked change for a man
past fifty. He had become a stylish dresser and
looked younger. He drove to work in a large
car with a chauffeur. In the early morning he
went riding on the <hi rend="font-style: italic">mesa</hi>,
mounted on a big
Kentucky fox-trotter, clad in English riding
clothes, jouncing solemnly up and down on his
flat saddle, and followed by a couple of carefully-laundered
white poodles. On these expeditions
he was a source of great edification and some
amusement to the natives.</p>

<p>In the town he was a man of weight and influence,
but the country Mexicans hated him.
Once when he was looking over some lands
recently acquired by the foreclosure of mortgages,
a bullet had whistled close to his ear, and another
<pb n="118"/><anchor id="Pg118"/>
had punctured the hood of his car. He now hired
a man to do his <q>outside work.</q></p>

<p>Thus both MacDougall and his children had
thrived and developed on their wealth. Mrs.
MacDougall, perhaps, had been the sacrifice.
She remained a tall, thin, pale, tired-looking
woman with large hands that were a record of
toil. She laboured at her new social duties and
<q>pleasures</q> in exactly the same spirit that she
had formerly laboured at the wash tub.</p>

<p>MacDougall&rsquo;s offices now occupied all of the
ground floor of a large new building which he had
built. Like everything else of his authorship this
building represented a determined effort to lend
the town an air of Eastern elegance. It was
finished in an imitation of white marble and the
offices had large plate glass windows which bore
in gilt letters the legend: <q>MacDougall Land
and Cattle Company, Inc.</q> Within, half a
dozen girls in glass cages could be seen working
at typewriters and adding machines, while a cashier
occupied a little office of his own with a large
safe at his back, a little brass grating in front of
him, and a revolver visible not far from his right
hand.</p>

<p>The creator of this magnificence sat behind a
glasstop desk at the far end of a large and sunny
office with a bare and slippery floor. Many a
Mexican beggar for mercy, with a mortgage on
<pb n="119"/><anchor id="Pg119"/>
his home, had walked across this forbidding expanse
of polished hardwood toward the big man
with the merciless eye, as fearfully as ever a
<hi rend="font-style: italic">peon</hi>, sentenced to
forty lashes and salt in his
wounds, approached the seat of his owner to
plead for a whole skin. Truly, the weak can but
change masters.</p>

<p>This morning MacDougall was all affability.
As he stood up behind his desk, clad in a light
grey suit, large and ruddy, radiant of health and
prosperity, he was impressive, almost splendid.
Only the eyes, small and closeset, revealed the
worried and calculating spirit of the man.</p>

<p><q>Mr. Delcasar,</q> he said when they had shaken
hands and sat down, <q>I am glad to welcome you
to this office, and I hope to see you here many
times more. I will not waste time, for we are
both busy men. I asked you to come here because
I want to suggest a sort of informal partnership
between us, such as I had with your late
uncle, one of my best friends. I believe my plan
will be for the best interests of both of us.&hellip; I
suppose you know about what the arrangement
was between the Don and myself?</q></p>

<p><q>No; not in detail,</q> Ramon confessed. He
felt MacDougall&rsquo;s power at once. Facing the
man was a different matter from planning an
interview with him when alone. But he retained
sense enough to let MacDougall do the talking.</p>
<pb n="120"/><anchor id="Pg120"/>

<p><q>Have a cigar,</q> the great man continued, full
of sweetness, pushing a large and fragrant box
of perfectos across the desk. <q>I will outline the
situation to you briefly, as I see it.</q> Nothing
could have seemed more frank and friendly than
his manner.</p>

<p><q>As you doubtless know,</q> he went on, <q rend="post: none">your
estate includes a large area of mountain and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">mesa</hi>
land&mdash;a little more than nine thousand acres I
believe&mdash;north and west of the San Antonio
River in Arriba County. I own nearly as much
land on the east side of the river. The valley
itself is owned by a number of natives in small
farming tracts.
</q></p>

<p><q rend="post: none">I believe your estate also includes a few small
parcels of land in the valley, but not enough, you
understand, to be of much value by itself. Your
uncle also owned a few tracts in the valley east of
the river which he transferred to me, for a consideration,
because they abutted upon my holdings.
</q></p>

<p><q rend="post: none">Now the valley, as I scarcely need tell you,
is the key to the situation. In the first place, if
the country is to be properly developed as sheep
and cattle range, the valley will furnish the farming
land upon which hay for winter use can be
raised, and it also furnishes some good winter
range. Moreover, it is now an open secret that
the Denver and Rio Grande Railroad proposes
building a branch line through that country and
<pb n="121"/><anchor id="Pg121"/>
into the San Juan Valley. No surveys have been
made, but it is certain that the road must follow
the San Antonio to the top of the divide. There
is no other way through. I became aware of
this project some time ago through my eastern
connections, and told your uncle about it. He
and I joined forces for the purpose of gaining
control of the San Antonio Valley, and of the
railroad right-of-way.
</q></p>

<p><q rend="post: none">The proposition is a singularly attractive one.
Not only could the right-of-way be sold for a very
large sum, but we would afterward own a splendid
bit of cattle range, with farming land in the
valley, and with a railroad running through the
centre of it. There is nothing less than a fortune
to be made in the San Antonio Valley, Mr.
Delcasar.
</q></p>

<p><q rend="post: none">And the lands in the valley can be acquired.
Some of the small owners will sell outright.
Furthermore, they are all frequently in need of
money, especially during dry years when the crops
are not good. By advancing loans judiciously,
and taking land as security, title can often be
acquired.&hellip; I daresay you are not wholly unfamiliar
with the method.
</q></p>

<p><q rend="post: none">This work, Mr. Delcasar, requires large
capital, which I can command. It also requires
certain things which you have in an unusual
degree. You are of Spanish descent, you speak
<pb n="122"/><anchor id="Pg122"/>
the language fluently. You have political and
family prestige among the natives. All of this
will be of great service in persuading the natives
to sell, and in getting the necessary information
about land titles, which, as you know, requires
much research in old Spanish Church records
and much interviewing of the natives themselves.
</q></p>

<p><q>In the actual making of purchases, my name
need not appear. In fact, I think it is very
desirable that it should not appear. But understand
that I will furnish absolutely all of the capital
for the enterprise. I am offering you, Mr.
Delcasar, an opportunity to make a fortune without
investing a cent, and I feel that I can count
upon your acceptance.</q></p>

<p>At the close of this discourse, Ramon felt like
a surf-bather who has been overwhelmed by a
great and sudden wave and comes up gasping for
breath and struggling for a foothold. Never
had he heard anything so brilliantly plausible,
for never before had he come into contact with a
good mind in full action. Yet he regained his
balance in a moment. He was accustomed to
act by intuition, not by logic, and his intuition was
all against accepting MacDougall&rsquo;s offer. He
was not deceived by the Scotchman&rsquo;s show of
friendship and beneficence; he himself had an
aptitude for pretence, and he understood it better
<pb n="123"/><anchor id="Pg123"/>
than he would have understood sincerity. He
knew that whether he formed this partnership or
not, there was sure to be a struggle between him
and MacDougall for the dominance of the San
Antonio Valley. And his instinct was to stand
free and fight; not to come to grips, MacDougall
was a stronger man than he. The one advantage
which he had&mdash;his influence over the natives&mdash;he
must keep in his own hands, and not let his
adversary turn it against him.</p>

<p>He took his cigar out of his mouth, looked at
it a moment, and cleared his throat.</p>

<p><q>Mr. MacDougall,</q> he said slowly, <q>this offer
makes me proud. That you should have so much
confidence in me as to wish to make me your partner
is most gratifying. I am sorry that I must
refuse. I have other plans.&hellip;</q></p>

<p>MacDougall nodded, interrupting. This was
evidently a contingency he had calculated.</p>

<p><q>I&rsquo;m sorry, Mr. Delcasar. I had hoped to be
permanently associated with you in this venture.
But I think I understand. You are young.
Perhaps marriage, a home are your immediate
objects, and you need cash at once, rather than
a somewhat distant prospect of greater wealth.
In that case I think I can meet your wishes. I
am prepared to make you a good offer for all of
your holdings in the valley, and those immediately
<pb n="124"/><anchor id="Pg124"/>
adjoining it. The exact amount I cannot state at
this moment, but I feel sure we could agree as
to price.</q></p>

<p>Ramon was taken aback by the promptness of
the counter, confused, forced to think. Money
was a thing he wanted badly. He had little cash.
If MacDougall would give him fifty thousand,
he could go with Julia anywhere. He would be
free. But again the inward prompting, sure and
imperative, said no. He wanted the girl above
all things. But he wanted land, too. His was
the large and confident greed of youth. And he
could have the girl without making this concession.
MacDougall wanted to take the best of
his land and push him out of the game as a weakling,
a negligible. He wouldn&rsquo;t submit. He
would fight, and in his own way. What he
wanted now was to end the interview, to get away
from this battering, formidable opponent. He
rose.</p>

<p><q>I will think it over, Mr. MacDougall,</q> he
said. <q>And meantime, if you will send me an
offer in writing, I will appreciate it.</q></p>

<p>Some of the affability faded from MacDougall&rsquo;s
face as he too rose, and the worried
look in his little grey eyes intensified, as though
he sensed the fact that this was an evasion.
None-the-less he said good-bye cordially and
promised to write the letter.</p>
<pb n="125"/><anchor id="Pg125"/>

<p>Ramon went back to his office, his mind stimulated,
working intensely. Never before had he
thought so clearly and purposefully. He got
out an old government map of Arriba County,
and with the aid of the deeds in the safe which
contained all his uncle&rsquo;s important papers, he
managed to mark off his holdings. The whole
situation became as clear to him as a checker
game. He owned a bit of land in the valley
which ran all the way across it, and far out upon
the <hi rend="font-style: italic">mesa</hi>
in a long narrow strip. That was the
way land holdings were always divided under the
Spanish law&mdash;into strips a few hundred feet wide,
and sometimes as much as fourteen miles long.
This strip would in all probability be vital to
the proposed right-of-way. It explained MacDougall&rsquo;s
eagerness to take him as a partner or
else to buy him out. By holding it, he would
hold the key to the situation.</p>

<p>In order really to dominate the country and
to make his property grow in value he would have
to own more of the valley. And he could not
get money enough to buy except very slowly.
But he could use his influence with the natives to
prevent MacDougall from buying. MacDougall
was a gringo. The Mexicans hated him. He
had been shot at. Ramon could <q>preach the race
issue,</q> as the politicians put it.</p>

<p>The important thing was to strengthen and
<pb n="126"/><anchor id="Pg126"/>
assert his influence as a Mexican and a Delcasar.
He must go to Arriba County, open the old ranch
house he owned there, go among the people. He
must gain a real ascendency. He knew how to
do it. It was his birthright. He was full of
fight and ambition, confident, elated. The way
was clear before him. Tomorrow he would go
to Julia.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC17" type="chapter">
<pb n="127"/><anchor id="Pg127"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER XVII</hi>
</head>

<p>He had received a note of sympathy from her
soon after his uncle&rsquo;s death and he had called at
the Roths&rsquo; once, but had found several other
callers there and no opportunity of being alone
with her. Then she had gone away on a two-weeks,
automobile trip to the Mesa Verde
National Park, so that he had seen practically
nothing of her. But all of this time he had been
thinking of her more confidently than ever before.
He was rich now, he was strong. All of the
preliminaries had been finished. He could go
to her and claim her.</p>

<p>He called her on the telephone from his
office, and the Mexican maid answered. She
would see if Miss Roth was in. After a long
wait she reported that Miss Roth was out. He
tried again that day, and a third time the next
morning with a like result.</p>

<p>This filled him with anxious, angry bewilderment.
He felt sure she had not really been out
all three times. Were her mother and brother
keeping his message from her? Or had something
turned her against him? He remembered
with a keen pang of anxiety, for the first time,
<pb n="128"/><anchor id="Pg128"/>
the insinuations of Father Lugaria. Could that
miserable rumour have reached her? He had no
idea how she would have taken it if it had. He
really did not know or understand this girl at
all; he merely loved her and desired her with a
desire which had become the ruling necessity of
his life. To him she was a being of a different
sort, from a different world&mdash;a mystery. They
had nothing in common but a rebellious discontent
with life, and this glamorous bewildering
thing, so much stronger than they, so far
beyond their comprehension, which they called
their love.</p>

<p>That was the one thing he knew and counted
on. He knew how imperiously it drove him, and
he knew that she had felt its power too. He had
seen it shine in her eyes, part her lips; he had
heard it in her voice, and felt it tremble in her
body. If only he could get to her this potent
thing would carry them to its purpose through
all barriers.</p>

<p>Angry and resolute, he set himself to a systematic
campaign of telephoning. At last she
answered. Her voice was level, quiet, weary.</p>

<p><q>But I have an engagement for tonight,</q> she
told him.</p>

<p><q>Then let me come tomorrow,</q> he urged.</p>

<p><q>No; I can&rsquo;t do that. Mother is having some
people to dinner.&hellip;</q></p>
<pb n="129"/><anchor id="Pg129"/>

<p>At last he begged her to set a date, but she refused,
declared that her plans were unfixed, told
him to call <q>some other time.</q></p>

<p>His touchy pride rebelled now. He cursed
these gringos. He hated them. He wished
for the power to leave her alone, to humble her
by neglect. But he knew that he did have it.
Instead he waited a few days and then drove to
the house in his car, having first carefully ascertained
by watching that she was at home.</p>

<p>All three of them received him in their sitting
room, which they called the library. It was an
attractive room, sunny and tastefully furnished,
with a couple of book cases filled with new-looking
books in sets, a silver tea service on a little
wheeled table, flowers that matched the wall
paper, and a heavy mahogany table strewn with
a not-too-disorderly array of magazines and
paper knives. It was the envy of the local women
with social aspirations because it looked elegant
and yet comfortable.</p>

<p>Conversation was slow and painful. Mrs.
Roth and her son were icily formal, confining
themselves to the most commonplace remarks.
And Julia did not help him, as she had on his
first visit. She looked pale and tired and carefully
avoided his eyes.</p>

<p>When he had been there about half an hour,
Mrs. Roth turned to her daughter.</p>
<pb n="130"/><anchor id="Pg130"/>

<p><q>Julia,</q> she said, <q>If we are going to get to
Mrs. MacDougall&rsquo;s at half-past four you must
go and get ready. You will excuse her, won&rsquo;t you
Mr. Delcasar?</q></p>

<p>The girl obediently went up stairs without
shaking hands, and a few minutes later Ramon
went away, feeling more of misery and less of
self-confidence than ever before in his life.</p>

<p>He almost wholly neglected his work. Cortez
brought him a report that MacDougall had a
new agent, who was working actively in Arriba
County, but he paid no attention to it. His
life seemed to have lost purpose and interest.
For the first time he doubted her love. For the
first time he really feared that he would lose her.</p>

<p>Most of his leisure was spent riding or walking
about the streets, in the hope of catching a glimpse
of her. He passed her house as often as he
dared, and studied her movements. When he
saw her in the distance he felt an acute thrill of
mingled hope and misery. Only once did he meet
her fairly, walking with her brother, and then
she either failed to see him or pretended not to.</p>

<p>One afternoon about five o&rsquo;clock he left his
office and started home in his car. A storm was
piling up rapidly in big black clouds that rose
from behind the eastern mountains like giants
peering from ambush. It was sultry; there were
loud peals of thunder and long crooked flashes of
<pb n="131"/><anchor id="Pg131"/>
lightning. At this season of late summer the
weather staged such a portentous display almost
every afternoon, and it rained heavily in the
mountains; but the showers only reached the
thirsty <hi rend="font-style: italic">mesa</hi> and
valley lands about one day in
four.</p>

<p>Ramon drove home slowly, gloomily wondering
whether it would rain and hoping that it
would. A Southwesterner is always hoping for
rain, and in his present mood the rush and beat of
a storm would have been especially welcome.</p>

<p>His hopes were soon fulfilled. There was a
cold blast of wind, carrying a few big drops, and
then a sudden, drumming downpour that tore up
the dust of the street and swiftly converted it
into a sea of mud cut by yellow rivulets.</p>

<p>As his car roared down the empty street, he
glimpsed a woman standing in the shelter of a big
cottonwood tree, cowering against its trunk. A
quick thrill shot through his body. He jammed
down the brake so suddenly that his car skidded
and sloughed around. He carefully turned and
brought up at the curb.</p>

<p>She started at sight of him as he ran across the
side-walk toward her.</p>

<p><q>Come on quick!</q> he commanded, taking her
by the arm, <q>I&rsquo;ll get you home.</q> Before she
had time to say anything he had her in the car,
and they were driving toward the Roth house.
<pb n="132"/><anchor id="Pg132"/>
By the time they had reached it the first strength
of the shower was spent, and there was only a
light scattering rain with a rift showing in the
clouds over the mountains.</p>

<p>He deliberately passed the house, putting on
more speed as he did so.</p>

<p><q>But &hellip; I thought you were going to take me
home,</q> she said, putting a hand on his arm.</p>

<p><q>I&rsquo;m not,</q> he announced, without looking
around. His hands and eyes were fully occupied
with his driving, but a great suspense held his
breath. The hand left his arm, and he heard her
settle back in her seat with a sigh. A great
warm wave of joy surged through him.</p>

<p>He took the mountain road, which was a short
cut between Old Town and the mountains,
seldom used except by wood wagons. Within
ten minutes they were speeding across the
<hi rend="font-style: italic">mesa</hi>.
The rain was over and the clouds running across
the sky in tatters before a fresh west wind. Before
them the rolling grey-green waste of the
<hi rend="font-style: italic">mesa</hi>, spotted
and veined with silver waters,
reached to the blue rim of the mountains&mdash;empty
and free as an undiscovered world.</p>

<p>He slowed his car to ten miles an hour and
leaned back, steering with one hand. The other
fell upon hers, and closed over it. For a time
they drove along in silence, conscious only of that
<pb n="133"/><anchor id="Pg133"/>
electrical contact, and of the wind playing in their
faces and the soft rhythmical hum of the great
engine.</p>

<p>At the crest of a rise he stopped the car and
stood up, looking all about at the vast quiet wilderness,
filling his lungs with air. He liked that
serene emptiness. He had always felt at peace
with these still desolate lands that had been the
background of most of his life. Now, with the
consciousness of the woman beside him, they filled
him with a sort of rapture, an ecstasy of reverence
that had come down to him perhaps from
savage forebears who had worshipped the Earth
Mother with love and awe.</p>

<p>He dropped down beside her again and without
hesitation gathered her into his arms. After
a moment he held her a little away from him and
looked into her eyes.</p>

<p><q>Why wouldn&rsquo;t you let me come to see you?
Why did you treat me that way?</q> he plead.</p>

<p>She dropped her eyes.</p>

<p><q>They made me.</q></p>

<p><q>But why? Because I&rsquo;m a Mexican? And
does that make any difference to you?</q></p>

<p><q>O, I can&rsquo;t tell you.&hellip; They say awful
things about you. I don&rsquo;t believe them. No;
nothing about you makes any difference to me.</q></p>

<p>He held her close again.</p>
<pb n="134"/><anchor id="Pg134"/>

<p><q>Then you&rsquo;ll go away with me?</q></p>

<p><q>Yes,</q> she answered slowly, nodding her head.
<q>I&rsquo;ll go anywhere with you.</q></p>

<p><q>Now!</q> he demanded. <q>Will you go now?
We can drive through Scissors Pass to Abol on
the Southeastern and take a train to Denver.&hellip;</q></p>

<p><q>O, no, not now,</q> she plead. <q>Please not
now.&hellip; I can&rsquo;t go like this.&hellip;</q></p>

<p><q>Yes; now,</q> he urged. <q>We&rsquo;ll never have a
better chance.&hellip;</q></p>

<p><q>I beg you, if you love me, don&rsquo;t make me go
now. I must think &hellip; and get ready.&hellip; Why
I haven&rsquo;t even got any powder for my nose.</q></p>

<p>They both laughed. The tension was broken.
They were happy.</p>

<p><q>Give me a little while to get ready,</q> she
proposed, <q>and I&rsquo;ll go when you say.</q></p>

<p><q>You promise?</q></p>

<p><q>Cross my heart.&hellip; On my life and honour.
Please take me home now, so they won&rsquo;t suspect
anything. If only nobody sees us! Please hurry.
It&rsquo;ll be dark pretty soon. You can write to me.
It&rsquo;s so lonely out here!</q></p>

<p>He turned his car and drove slowly townward,
his free hand seeking hers again. It was dusk
when they reached the streets. Stopping his car
in the shadow of a tree, he kissed her and helped
her out.</p>

<p>He sat still and watched her out of sight. A
<pb n="135"/><anchor id="Pg135"/>
tinge of sadness and regret crept into his mind,
and as he drove homeward it grew into an active
discontent with himself. Why had he let her
go? True, he had proved her love, but now she
was to be captured all over again. He ought to
have taken her. He had been a fool. She
would have gone. She had begged him not to
take her, but if he had insisted, she would have
gone. He had been a fool!</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC18" type="chapter">
<pb n="136"/><anchor id="Pg136"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER XVIII</hi>
</head>

<p>The second morning after this ride, while he
was labouring over a note to the girl, he was
amazed to get one from her postmarked at
Lorietta, a station a hundred miles north of town
at the foot of the Mora Mountains, in which
many of the town people spent their summer vacations.
It was a small square missive, exhaling a
faint scent of lavender, and was simple and direct
as a telegram.</p>

<p><q>We have gone to the Valley Ranch for a
month,</q> she wrote. <q>We had not intended to go
until August, but there was a sudden change of
plans. Somebody saw you and me yesterday. I
had an awful time. Please don&rsquo;t try to see me
or write to me while we&rsquo;re here. It will be best
for us. I&rsquo;ll be back soon. I love you.</q></p>

<p>He sat glumly thinking over this letter for a
long time. The disappointment of learning that
he would not see her for a month was bad enough,
but it was not the worst thing about this
sudden development. For this made him realize
what alert and active opposition he faced on the
part of her mother and brother. Their dislike
for him had been made manifest again and again,
<pb n="137"/><anchor id="Pg137"/>
but he had supposed that Julia was successfully
deceiving them as to his true relations with her.
He had thought that he was regarded merely as
an undesirable acquaintance; but if they were
changing their plans because of him, taking the
girl out of his reach, they must have guessed the
true state of affairs. And for all that he knew,
they might leave the country at any time. His
heart seemed to give a sharp twist in his body at
this thought. He must take her as soon as she
returned to town. He could not afford to miss
another chance. And meantime his affairs must
be gotten in order.</p>

<p>He had been neglecting his new responsibilities,
and there was an astonishing number of things to
be done&mdash;debts to be paid, tax assessments to be
protested, men to be hired for the sheep-shearing.
His uncle had left his affairs at loose ends, and on
all hands were men bent on taking advantage of
the fact. But he knew the law; he had known
from childhood the business of raising sheep on
the open range which was the backbone of his
fortune; and he was held in a straight course by
the determination to keep his resources together
so that they would strengthen him in his purpose.</p>

<p>A few weeks before, he had sent Cortez to
Arriba County to attend to some minor matters
there, and incidentally to learn if possible what
MacDougall was doing. Cortez had spent a
<pb n="138"/><anchor id="Pg138"/>
large part of his time talking with the Mexicans
in the San Antonio Valley, eavesdropping on conversations
in little country stores, making friends,
and asking discreet questions at
<hi rend="font-style: italic">bailes</hi> and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">fiestas</hi>.</p>

<p><q>Well; how goes it up there?</q> Ramon asked
him when he came to the office to make his report.</p>

<p><q>It looks bad enough,</q> Cortez replied lighting
with evident satisfaction the big cigar his patron
had given him. <q>MacDougall has men working
there all the time. He bought a small ranch on
the edge of the valley just the other day. He is
not making very fast progress, but he&rsquo;ll own the
valley in time if we don&rsquo;t stop him.</q></p>

<p><q>But who is doing the work? Who is his
agent?</q> Ramon enquired.</p>

<p><q>Old Solomon Alfego, for one. He&rsquo;s boss of
the county, you know. He hates a gringo as
much as any man alive, but he loves a dollar, too,
and MacDougall has bought him, I&rsquo;m afraid. I
think MacDougall is lending money through him,
getting mortgages on ranches that way.</q></p>

<p><q>Well; what do you think we had better do?</q>
Ramon enquired. The situation looked bad
on its face, but he could see that Cortez had a
plan.</p>

<p><q>Just one thing I thought of,</q> the little man
answered slowly. <q>We have got to get Alfego
on our side. If we can do that, we can keep out
MacDougall and everybody else &hellip; buy when
<pb n="139"/><anchor id="Pg139"/>
we get ready. We couldn&rsquo;t pay Alfego much,
but we could let him in on the railroad deal &hellip;
something MacDougall won&rsquo;t do. And Alfego,
you know, is a <hi rend="font-style: italic">penitente</hi>.
He&rsquo;s <hi rend="font-style: italic">hermano mayor</hi>
(chief brother) up there. And all those little
<hi rend="font-style: italic">rancheros</hi> are
<hi rend="font-style: italic">penitentes</hi>. It&rsquo;s the strongest
<hi rend="font-style: italic">penitente</hi> county
in the State, and you know none
of the <hi rend="font-style: italic">penitentes</hi>
like gringos. None of those
fellows like MacDougall; they&rsquo;re all afraid of
him. All they like is his money. You haven&rsquo;t so
much money, but you could spend some. You
could give a few <hi rend="font-style: italic">bailes</hi>.
You are Mexican; your
family is well-known. If you were a
<hi rend="font-style: italic">penitente</hi>,
too.&hellip;</q></p>

<p>Cortez left his sentence hanging in the air.
He nodded his head slowly, his cigar cocked at a
knowing angle, looking at Ramon through narrowed
lids.</p>

<p>Ramon sat looking straight before him for a
moment. He saw in imagination a procession of
men trudging half-naked in the raw March
weather, their backs gashed so that blood ran
down to their heels, beating themselves and each
other.&hellip; The <hi rend="font-style: italic">penitentes</hi>!
Other men, even
gringos, had risen to power by joining the order.
Why not he? It would give him just the prestige
and standing he needed in that country. He
would lose a little blood. He would win &hellip;
everything!</p>
<pb n="140"/><anchor id="Pg140"/>

<p><q>You are right, <hi rend="font-style: italic">amigo</hi>,</q>
he told Cortez. <q>But
do you think it can be arranged?</q></p>

<p><q>I have talked to Alfego about it,</q> Cortez
admitted. <q>I think it can be arranged.</q></p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC19" type="chapter">
<pb n="141"/><anchor id="Pg141"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER XIX</hi>
</head>

<p>He was all ready to leave for Arriba County
when one more black mischance came to bedevil
him. Cortez came into the office with a worried
look in his usually unrevealing eyes.</p>

<p><q>There&rsquo;s a woman in town looking for you,</q>
he announced. <q>A Mexican girl from the
country. She was asking everybody she met
where to find you. You ought to be more
careful. I took her to my house and promised I
would bring you right away.</q></p>

<p>Cortez lived in a little square box of a brick
cottage, which he had been buying slowly for the
past ten years and would probably never own.
In its parlour, gaudy with cheap, new furniture,
Ramon confronted Catalina Archulera. She was
clad in a dirty calico dress, and her shoes were
covered with the dust of long tramping, as was
the black shawl about her head and shoulders.
Once he had thought her pretty, but now she
looked to him about as attractive as a clod of
earth.</p>

<p>She stood before him with downcast eyes,
speechless with misery and embarassment. At
first he was utterly puzzled as to what could have
<pb n="142"/><anchor id="Pg142"/>
brought her there. Then with a queer mixture
of anger and pity and disgust, he noticed the
swollen bulk of her healthy young body.</p>

<p><q>Catalina! Why did you come here?</q> he
blurted, all his self-possession gone for a moment.</p>

<p><q>My father sent me,</q> she replied, as simply as
though that were an all-sufficient explanation.</p>

<p><q>But why did you tell him &hellip; it was I?
Why didn&rsquo;t you come to me first?</q></p>

<p><q>He made me tell,</q> Catalina rolled back her
sleeve and showed some blue bruises. <q>He beat
me,</q> she explained without emotion.</p>

<p><q>What did he tell you to say?</q></p>

<p><q>He told me to come to you and show you how
I am.&hellip; That is all.</q></p>

<p>Ramon swore aloud with a break in his voice.
For a long moment he stood looking at her, bewildered,
disgusted. It somehow seemed to him
utterly wrong, utterly unfair that this thing should
have happened, and above all that it should have
happened now. He had taken other girls, as had
every other man, but never before had any such
hard luck as this befallen him. And now, of
all times!</p>

<p>In Catalina he felt not the faintest interest.
Before him was the proof that once he had desired
her. Now that desire had vanished as completely
as his childhood.</p>

<p>And she was Archulera&rsquo;s daughter. That was
<pb n="143"/><anchor id="Pg143"/>
the hell of it! Archulera was the one man of all
men whom he could least afford to offend. And
he knew just how hard to appease the old man
would be. For among the Mexicans, seduction
is a crime which, in theory and often in practice,
can be atoned only by marriage or by the shedding
of blood. Marriage is the door to freedom for
the women, but virginity is a thing greatly revered
and carefully guarded. The unmarried girl is
always watched, often locked up, and he who
appropriates her to his own purpose is violating
a sacred right and offending her whole family.</p>

<p>In the towns, all this has been somewhat
changed, as the customs of any country suffer
change in towns. But old Archulera, living in
his lonely canyon, proud of his high lineage,
would be the hardest of men to appease. And
meantime, what was to be done with the girl?</p>

<p>It was this problem which brought his wits
back to him. A plan began to form in his mind.
He saw that in sending her to him Archulera had
really played into his hands. The important
thing now was to keep her away from her father.
He looked at her again, and the pity which he
always felt for weaklings welled up in him. He
knew many Mexican ranches in the valley where
he could keep her in comfort for a small amount.
That would serve a double purpose. The old
man would be kept in ignorance as to what Ramon
<pb n="144"/><anchor id="Pg144"/>
intended, and the girl would be saved from
<corr sic="furthur"><anchor id="E8"/>
<ref target="e8">further</ref></corr>
punishment. Meantime, he could send
Cortez to see Archulera and find out what money
would do.</p>

<p>The whole affair was big with potential damage
to him. Some of his enemies might find out
about it and make a scandal. Archulera might
come around in an ugly mood and make trouble.
The girl might run away and come to town again.
And yet, now that he had a plan, he was all
confidence.</p>

<p>Cortez kept Catalina at his house while Ramon
drove forty miles up the valley and made arrangements
with a Mexican who lived in an isolated
place, to care for her for an indefinite period.
When he took Catalina there, he told her on the
way simply that she was to wait until he came for
her, and above all, that she must not try to communicate
with her father. The girl nodded,
looking at him gravely with her large soft eyes.
Her lot had always been to obey, to bear burdens
and to suffer. The stuff of rebellion and of self-assertion
was not in her, but she could endure misfortune
with the stoical indifference of a savage.
Indeed, she was in all essentials simply a squaw.
During the ride to her new home she seemed more
interested in the novel sensation of travelling at
thirty miles an hour than in her own future. She
clung to the side of the car with both hands, and
<pb n="145"/><anchor id="Pg145"/>
her face reflected a pathetic mingling of fear and
delight.</p>

<p>The house of Nestor Gomez to which Ramon
took her was prettily set in a grove of cottonwoods,
with white hollyhocks blooming on either
side of the door, and strings of red chile hanging
from the rafter-ends to dry. Half a dozen
small children played about the door, the younger
ones naked and all of them deep in dirt. A hen
led her brood of chicks into the house on a foray
for crumbs, and in the shade of the wall a mongrel
bitch luxuriously gave teat to four pups. Bees
humming about the hollyhocks bathed the scene
in sleepy sound.</p>

<p>Catalina, utterly unembarassed, shook hands
with her host and hostess in the limp, brief way
of the Mexicans, and then, while Ramon talked
with them, sat down in the shade, shook loose
her heavy black hair and began to comb it. A
little half-naked urchin of three years came and
stood before her. She stopped combing to place
her hands on his shoulders, and the two regarded
each other long and intently, while Catalina&rsquo;s
mouth framed a smile of dull wonder.</p>

<p>As Ramon drove back to town, he marvelled
that he should ever have desired this clod of a
woman; but he was grateful to her for the bovine
calm with which she accepted things. He would
visit her once in a while. He felt pretty sure
<pb n="146"/><anchor id="Pg146"/>
that he could count on her not to make trouble.</p>

<p>Afterward he discussed the situation with
Cortez. The latter was worried.</p>

<p><q>You better look out,</q> he counselled. <q>You
better send him a message you are going to marry
her. That will keep him quiet for a while.
When he gets over being mad, maybe you can
make him take a thousand dollars instead.</q></p>

<p>Ramon shook his head. If he gave Archulera
to understand that he would marry the girl, word
of it might get to town.</p>

<p><q>He&rsquo;ll never find her,</q> he said confidently.
<q>I&rsquo;ll do nothing unless he comes to me.</q></p>

<p><q>I don&rsquo;t know,</q> Cortez replied doubtfully.
<q>Is he a <hi rend="font-style: italic">penitente</hi>?</q></p>

<p><q>Yes; I think he is,</q> Ramon admitted.</p>

<p><q>Then maybe he&rsquo;ll find her pretty quick.
There are some <hi rend="font-style: italic">penitentes</hi>
still in the valley and
all <hi rend="font-style: italic">penitentes</hi>
work together. You better look
out.</q></p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC20" type="chapter">
<pb n="147"/><anchor id="Pg147"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER XX</hi>
</head>

<p>He had resolutely put the thought of Julia as
much out of his mind as possible. He had
conquered his disappointment at not being able to
see her for a month, and had resolved to devote
that month exclusively to hard work. And now
came another one of those small, square, brief
letters with its disturbing scent of lavender, and
its stamp stuck upside down near the middle of
the envelope.</p>

<p><q>I will be in town tomorrow when you get
this,</q> she wrote, <q>But only for a day or two. We
are going to move up to the capital for the rest of
the year. Gordon is going to stay here now.
Just mother and I are coming down to pack up
our things. You can come and see me tomorrow
evening.</q></p>

<p>It was astonishing, it was disturbing, it was
incomprehensible. And it did not fit in with his
plans. He had intended to go North and return
before she did; then, with all his affairs in order,
ask her to go away with him. Cortez had
already sent word to Alfego that Ramon was
coming to Arriba County. He could not afford
a change of plans now. But the prospect of
<pb n="148"/><anchor id="Pg148"/>
seeing her again filled him with pleasure, sent a
sort of weakening excitement tingling through
his body.</p>

<p>And what did it mean that he was to be allowed
to call on her? Had she, by any chance, won
over her mother and brother? No; he couldn&rsquo;t
believe it. But he went to her house that evening
shaken by great hopes and anticipations.</p>

<p>She wore a black dress that left her shoulders
bare, and set off the slim perfection of her little
figure. Her face was flushed and her eyes were
deep. How much more beautiful she was than
the image he carried in his mind! He had been
thinking of her all this while, and yet he had forgotten
how beautiful she was. He could think
of nothing to say at first, but held her by both
hands and looked at her with eyes of wonder
and desire. He felt a fool because his knees were
weak and he was tremulous. But a happy fool!
The touch and the sight of her seemed to dissolve
his strength, and also the hardness and the bitterness
that life had bred in him, the streak of
animal ferocity that struggle brought out in him.
He was all desire, but desire bathed in tenderness
and hope. She made him feel as once long ago
he had felt in church when the music and the
pageantry and sweet odours of the place had filled
his childish spirit with a strange sense of harmony.
He had felt small and unworthy, yet happy and
<pb n="149"/><anchor id="Pg149"/>
forgiven. So now he felt in her presence that he
was black and bestial beside her, but that possession
of her would somehow wash him clean and
bring him peace.</p>

<p>When he tried to draw her to him she shook
her head, not meeting his eyes and freed herself
gently.</p>

<p><q>No, no. I must tell you.&hellip;</q> She led
him to a seat, and went on, looking down at a toe
that played with a design in the carpet. <q>I must
explain. I promised mother that if she would
let me see you this once to tell you, I would never
try to see you again.</q></p>

<p>There was a long silence, during which he
could feel his heart pounding and could see that
she breathed quickly. Then suddenly he took her
face in both hot hands and turned it toward him,
made her meet his eyes.</p>

<p><q>But of course you didn&rsquo;t mean that,</q> he said.</p>

<p>She struggled weakly against his strength.</p>

<p><q>I don&rsquo;t know. I thought I did.&hellip; It&rsquo;s terrible.
You know&hellip; I wrote you &hellip; some
one saw us together. Gordon and mother found
out about it. I won&rsquo;t tell you all that they said,
but it was awful. It made me angry, and they
found out that I love you. It had a terrible effect
on Gordon. It made him worse. I can&rsquo;t tell you
how awful it is for me. I love you. But I love
him too. And to think I&rsquo;m hurting him when
<pb n="150"/><anchor id="Pg150"/>
he&rsquo;s sick, when I&rsquo;ve lived in the hope he would get
well.&hellip;</q></p>

<p>She was breathing hard now. Her eyes were
bright with tears. All her defences were down,
her fine dignity vanished. When he took her in
his arms she struggled a little at first; then yielded
with closed eyes to his hot kisses.</p>

<p>Afterward they talked a little, but not to much
purpose. He had important things to tell her,
they had plans to make. But their great disturbing
hunger for each other would not let them
think of anything else. Their conversation was
always interrupted by hot confusing embraces.</p>

<p>The clock struck eleven, and she jumped up.</p>

<p><q>I promised to make you go home at eleven,</q>
she told him.</p>

<p><q>But I must tell you &hellip; I have to leave town
for a while.</q> He found his tongue suddenly.
Briefly he outlined the situation he faced with
regard to his estate. Of course, he said nothing
about the <hi rend="font-style: italic">penitentes</hi>,
but he made her understand
that he was going forth to fight for both their
fortunes.</p>

<p><q>I can&rsquo;t do it, I won&rsquo;t go, unless I know I am
to have you,</q> he finished. <q>Everything I have
done, everything I am going to do is for you. If
I lose you I lose everything. You promise to go
with me?</q></p>

<p>His eyes were burning with earnestness, and
<pb n="151"/><anchor id="Pg151"/>
hers were wide with admiration. He did not
really understand her, nor she him. Unalterable
differences of race and tradition and temperament
stood between them. They had little in common
save a great primitive hunger. But that, none-the-less,
for the moment genuinely transfigured
and united them.</p>

<p>She drew a deep breath.</p>

<p><q>Yes. You must promise not to try to see me
until then. When you are ready, let me know.</q></p>

<p>She threw back her head, opening her arms to
him. For a moment she hung limp in his embrace;
then pushed him away and ran upstairs,
leaving him to find his way out alone.</p>

<p>He walked home slowly, trying to straighten
out his thoughts. Her presence seemed still to
be all about him. One of her hairs was tangled
about a button of his coat; her powder and the
scent of her were all over his shoulder; the recollection
of her kisses smarted sweetly on his
mouth. He was weak, confused, ridiculously
happy. But he knew that he would carry North
with him greater courage and purpose than ever
before he had known.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC21" type="chapter">
<pb n="152"/><anchor id="Pg152"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER XXI</hi>
</head>

<p>In the dry clean air of the Southwest all things
change slowly. Growth is slow and decay is even
slower. The body of a dead horse in the desert
does not rot but dessicates, the hide remaining
intact for months, the bones perhaps for years.
Men and beasts often live to great age. The
<hi rend="font-style: italic">pinon</hi> trees on
the red hills were there when the
conquerors came, and they are not much larger
now&mdash;only more gnarled and twisted.</p>

<p>This strange inertia seems to possess institutions
and customs as well as life itself. In the
valley towns, it is true, the railroads have brought
and thrown down all the conveniences and incongruities
of civilization. But ride away from the
railroads into the mountains or among the lava
<hi rend="font-style: italic">mesas</hi>, and you
are riding into the past. You
will see little earthen towns, brown or golden or
red in the sunlight, according to the soil that bore
them, which have not changed in a century. You
will see grain threshed by herds of goats and
ponies driven around and around the threshing
floors, as men threshed grain before the Bible was
written. You will see Indian pueblos which have
not changed materially since the brave days when
<pb n="153"/><anchor id="Pg153"/>
Coronado came to Taos and the Spanish soldiers
stormed the heights of Acoma. You will hear
of strange Gods and devils and of the evil eye.
It is almost as though this crystalline air were
indeed a great clear crystal, impervious to time,
in which the past is forever encysted.</p>

<p>The region in which Ramon&rsquo;s heritage lay was
a typical part of this forgotten land. In the
southern end of the Rocky Mountains, it was a
country of great tilted
<hi rend="font-style: italic">mesas</hi> reaching above
timber line, covered for the most part with heavy
forests of pine and fir, with here and there great
upland pastures swept clean by forest fires of
long ago. Along the lower slopes of the mountains,
where the valleys widened, were primitive
little <hi rend="font-style: italic">adobe</hi>
towns, in which the Mexicans lived,
each owning a few acres of tillable land. In the
summer they followed their sheep herds in the
upland pastures. There were not a hundred
white men in the whole of Arriba County, and no
railroad touched it.</p>

<p>In this region a few Mexicans who were
shrewder or stronger than the others, who owned
stores or land, dominated the rest of the people
much as the <hi rend="font-style: italic">patrones</hi>
had dominated them in the
days before the Mexican War. Here still
flourished the hatred for the gringo which culminated
in that war. Here that strange sect, the
<hi rend="font-style: italic">penitentes hermanos</hi>,
half savage and half mediaeval,
<pb n="154"/><anchor id="Pg154"/>
still was strong and still recruited its
strength every year with young men, who elsewhere
were refusing to undergo its brutal tortures.</p>

<p>For all of these reasons, this was an advantageous
field for the fight Ramon proposed to
make. In the valley MacDougall&rsquo;s money and
influence would surely have beaten him. But
here he could play upon the ancient hatred for the
gringo; here he could use to the best advantage the
prestige of his family; here, above all, if he could
win over the <hi rend="font-style: italic">penitentes</hi>,
he could do almost anything
he pleased.</p>

<p>His plan of joining that ancient order to gain
influence was not an original one. Mexican
politicians and perhaps one or two gringos had
done it, and the fact was a matter of common
gossip. Some of these <hi rend="font-style: italic">penitentes</hi>
for a purpose
had been men of great influence, and their initiations
had been tempered to suit their sensitive
skins. Others had been Mexicans of the poorer
sort, capable of sharing the half-fanatic, half sadistic
spirit of the thing.</p>

<p>Ramon came to the order as a young and almost
unknown man seeking its aid. He could not hope
for much mercy. And though he was primitive
in many ways, there was nothing in him that
responded to the spirit of this ordeal. The
thought of Christ crucified did not inspire him to
endure suffering. But the thought of a girl with
yellow hair did.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC22" type="chapter">
<pb n="155"/><anchor id="Pg155"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER XXII</hi>
</head>

<p>Ramon went first to the ranch at the foot of
the mountains which his uncle had used as a headquarters,
and which had belonged to the family
for about half a century. It consisted merely
of an <hi rend="font-style: italic">adobe</hi> ranch house
and barn and a log corral
for rounding up horses.</p>

<p>Here Ramon left his machine. Here also he
exchanged his business suit for corduroys, a wide
hat and high-heeled riding boots. He greatly
fancied himself in this costume and he embellished
it with a silk bandana of bright scarlet and with
a large pair of silver spurs which had belonged
to his uncle, and which he found in the saddle
room of the barn. From the accoutrement in
this room he also selected the most pretentious-looking
saddle. It was a heavy stock saddle,
with German silver mountings and saddle bags
covered with black bear fur. A small red and
black Navajo blanket served as a saddle pad and
he found a fine Navajo bridle, too, woven of
black horsehair, with a big hand-hammered silver
buckle on each cheek.</p>

<p>He had the old Mexican who acted as caretaker
for the ranch drive all of the ranch horses into
<pb n="156"/><anchor id="Pg156"/>
the corral, and chose a spirited roan mare for a
saddle animal. He always rode a roan horse
when he could get one because a roan mustang
has more spirit than one of any other colour.</p>

<p>The most modern part of his equipment was
his weapon. He did not want to carry one
openly, so he had purchased a small but highly
efficient automatic pistol, which he wore in a
shoulder scabbard inside his shirt and under his
left elbow.</p>

<p>When his preparations were completed he
rode straight to the town of Alfego where the
powerful Solomon had his establishment, dismounted
under the big cottonwoods and strolled
into the long, dark cluttered
<hi rend="font-style: italic">adobe</hi> room which
was Solomon Alfego&rsquo;s store. Three or four Mexican
clerks were waiting upon as many Mexican
customers, with much polite, low-voiced conversation,
punctuated by long silences while the customers
turned the goods over and over in their
hands. Ramon&rsquo;s entrance created a slight diversion.
None of them knew him, for he had not
been in that country for years, but all of them
recognized that he was a person of weight and
importance. He saluted all at once, lifting his
hat, with a cordial <q><hi rend="font-style: italic">Como
lo va, amigos</hi>,</q> and
then devoted himself to an apparently interested
inspection of the stock. This, if conscientiously
<pb n="157"/><anchor id="Pg157"/>
done, would have afforded a week&rsquo;s occupation,
for Solomon Alfego served as sole merchant for
a large territory and had to be prepared to supply
almost every human want. There were shelves
of dry goods and of hardware, of tobacco and of
medicines. In the centre of the store was
a long rack, heavily laden with saddlery and
harness of all kinds, and all around the top of the
room, above the shelves, ran a row of religious
pictures, including popes, saints, and cardinals,
Mary with the infant, Christ crucified and Christ
bearing the cross, all done in bright colours and
framed, for sale at about three dollars each.</p>

<p>It was not long before word of the stranger&rsquo;s
arrival reached Alfego in his little office behind
the store, and he came bustling out, beaming and
polite.</p>

<p><q>This is Senor Solomon Alfego?</q> Ramon
enquired in his most formal Spanish.</p>

<p><q>I am Solomon Alfego,</q> replied the bulky little
man, with a low bow, <q>and what can I do for the
Senor?</q></p>

<p><q>I am Ramon Delcasar,</q> Ramon replied, extending
his hand with a smile, <q>and it may be that
you can do much for me.</q></p>

<p><q>Ah-h-h!</q> breathed Alfego, with another bow,
<q>Ramon Delcasar! And I knew you when you
were <hi rend="font-style: italic">un muchachito</hi></q>
(a little boy). He bent
<pb n="158"/><anchor id="Pg158"/>
over and measured scant two feet from the floor
with his hand. <q>My house is yours. I am at
your service. <hi rend="font-style: italic">Siempre!</hi></q></p>

<p>The two strolled about the store, talking of
the weather, politics, business, the old days&mdash;everything
except what they were both thinking
about. Alfego opened a box of cigars, and having
lit a couple of these, they went out on the long
porch and sat down on an old buggy seat to
continue the conversation. Alfego admired
Ramon&rsquo;s horse and especially his silver-mounted
saddle.</p>

<p><q>Ha! you like the saddle!</q> Ramon exclaimed
in well-stimulated delight. He rose, swiftly undid
the cinches, and dropped saddle and blanket
at the feet of his host. <q>It is yours!</q> he announced.</p>

<p><q>A thousand thanks,</q> Alfego replied. <q>Come;
I wish to show you some Navajo blankets I
bought the other day.</q> He led the way into the
store, and directed one of his clerks to bring forth
a great stack of the heavy Indian weaves, and
began turning them over. They were blankets
of the best quality, and some of the designs in red,
black and grey were of exceptional beauty.
Ramon stood smiling while his host turned over
one blanket after another. As he displayed each
one he turned his bright pop-eyes on Ramon with
an eager enquiring look. At last when he had
<pb n="159"/><anchor id="Pg159"/>
seen them all, Ramon permitted himself to pick up
and examine the one he considered the best with
a restrained murmur of admiration.</p>

<p><q>You like it!</q> exclaimed Alfego with delight.
<q>It is yours!</q></p>

<p>Mutual good feeling having thus been signalized
in the traditional Mexican manner by an exchange
of gifts, Alfego now showed his guest all
over his establishment. It included, in addition to
the store, several ware rooms where were piled
stinking bales of sheep and goat and cow hides,
sacks of raw wool and of corn, pelts of wild
animals and bags of
<hi rend="font-style: italic">pinon</hi> nuts, and of beans, all
taken from the Mexicans in trade. Afterward
Ramon met the family, of patriarchal proportions,
including an astonishing number of little brown
children having the bright eyes and well developed
noses of the great Solomon. Then came supper,
a long and bountiful feast, at which great quantities
of mutton, chile, and beans were served.</p>

<p>Having thus been duly impressed with the
greatness and substance of his host, and also with
his friendly attitude, Ramon was led into the
little office, offered a seat and a fresh cigar. He
knew that at last the proper time had come for
him to declare himself.</p>

<p><q>My friend,</q> he said, leaning toward Alfego
confidentially, <q>I have come to this country and to
you for a great purpose. You know that a rich
<pb n="160"/><anchor id="Pg160"/>
gringo has been buying the lands of the poor
people&mdash;my people and yours&mdash;all through this
country. You know that he intends to own all of
this country&mdash;to take it away from us Mexicans.
If he succeeds, he will take away all of your
business, all of my lands. You and I must fight
him together. Am I right?</q></p>

<p>Solomon nodded his head slowly, watching
Ramon with wide bright eyes.</p>

<p><q><hi rend="font-style: italic">Verdad!</hi></q>
he pronounced unctuously.</p>

<p><q>I have come,</q> Ramon went on more boldly,
<q>because my own lands are in danger, but also
because I love the Mexican people, and hate the
gringos! Some one must go among these good
people and warn them not to sell their lands, not
to be cheated out of their birthrights. My friend,
I have come here to do that.</q></p>

<p><q><hi rend="font-style: italic">Bueno!</hi></q> exclaimed Alfego.
<q><hi rend="font-style: italic">Muy bueno!</hi></q></p>

<p><q>My friend, I must have your help.</q></p>

<p>Ramon said this as impressively as possible, and
paused expectantly, but as Alfego said nothing, he
went on, gathering his wits for the supreme effort.</p>

<p><q>I know that you are a leader in the great
fraternity of the penitent brothers, who are the
best and most pious of men. My friend, I wish
to become one of them. I wish to mingle my
blood with theirs and with the blood of Christ,
that all of us may be united in our great purpose
<pb n="161"/><anchor id="Pg161"/>
to keep this country for the Spanish people, who
conquered it from the barbarians.</q></p>

<p>Alfego looked very grave, puffed his cigar
violently three times and spat before he answered.</p>

<p><q>My young friend,</q> (he spoke slowly and
solemnly) <q>to pour out your blood in penance and
to consecrate your body to Christ is a great thing
to do. Have you meditated deeply upon this
step? Are you sure the Lord Jesus has called you
to his service? And what assurance have I that
you are sincere in all you say, that if I make you
my brother in the blood of Christ, you will truly
be as a brother to me?</q></p>

<p>Ramon bowed his head.</p>

<p><q>I have thought long on this,</q> he said softly,
<q>and I know my heart. I desire to be a blood
brother to all these, my people. And to you&mdash;I
give you my word as a Delcasar that I will
serve you well, that I will be as a brother to you.</q></p>

<p>There was a silence during which Alfego stared
with profound gravity at the ash on the end of
his cigar.</p>

<p><q>Have you heard,</q> Ramon went on, in the
same soft and emotional tone of voice, <q>that the
Denver and Rio Grande Railroad is going to
build a line through the San Antonio Valley?</q></p>

<p>Alfego, without altering his look of rapt meditation,
nodded his head slowly.</p>
<pb n="162"/><anchor id="Pg162"/>

<p><q>Do you suppose that you will gain anything
by that, if this gringo gets these lands?</q> Ramon
went on. <q>You know that you will not. But I
will make you my partner. And I will give you
the option on any of my mountain land that you
may wish to rent for sheep range. More than
that, I will make you a written agreement to do
these things. In all ways we will be as brothers.</q></p>

<p><q>You are a worthy and pious young man!</q>
exclaimed Solomon Alfego, rolling his eyes upward,
his voice vibrant with emotion. <q>You
shall be my brother in the blood of Christ.</q></p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC23" type="chapter">
<pb n="163"/><anchor id="Pg163"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER XXIII</hi>
</head>

<p>Ramon went to the
<hi rend="font-style: italic">Morada</hi>, the chapter house
of the <hi rend="font-style: italic">penitentes</hi>,
alone and late at night, for all
of the whippings and initiations of the order,
except those of Holy Week, are carried on in the
utmost secrecy.</p>

<p>The <hi rend="font-style: italic">Morada</hi>
stood halfway up the slope north
of the little town, at the elevation where the tall
yellow pines of the mountains begin to replace
the scrubby juniper and <hi rend="font-style: italic">pinon</hi>
of the <hi rend="font-style: italic">mesas</hi> and
foothills. It was a cool moonlit night of late
summer. A light west wind breathed through
the trees, making the massive black shadows of
the juniper bushes faintly alive. As he toiled up
the rocky path Ramon heard the faraway yap and
yodel of a coyote, and the still more distant
answer of another one. From the valley below
came the intermittent bay of a cur, inspired by the
moon and his wild kin, and now and then the tiny
silver tinkle of a goat bell.</p>

<p>The <hi rend="font-style: italic">Morada</hi>
stood in an open space. It was
an oblong block of <hi rend="font-style: italic">adobe</hi>,
and gave forth neither
light nor sound. Ramon stopped a little way
from it in the shadow of a tree and lit a cigarette
to steady his nerves. He felt now for the first
<pb n="164"/><anchor id="Pg164"/>
time something of the mystery and terribleness of
this barbaric order which he proposed to use for
his purpose. All his life the
<hi rend="font-style: italic">penitentes</hi> had been
to him a well-known fact of life. For the past
week he had spent much of his time with the
<hi rend="font-style: italic">maestro de novios</hi>
of the local chapter, a wizened
old sheep herder, who had instructed him monotonously
in the secrets of the order, almost lulling
him to sleep with his endless mumblings of
the ritual that was written in a little leather book
a century old. He had learned that if he betrayed
the secrets of the order, he would be buried
alive with only his head sticking out of the
ground, so that the ants might eat his face. He
had been informed that if he fell ill he would be
taken to the <hi rend="font-style: italic">Morada</hi>
where his brothers in Christ
would pray for him, and seek to drive the devil
out of his body, and that if he died, they would
send his shoes to his family as a notice of that
event; and would bury him in consecrated
ground. Some of the things he had learned had
bored him and some had made him want to laugh,
but none of them had impressed him, as they
were intended to do, with the might and dignity
of the ancient order.</p>

<p>He was impressed now as he stood before this
dark still house where a dozen ignorant fanatics
waited to take his blood for what was to them a
holy purpose. He knew that this
<hi rend="font-style: italic">Morada</hi> was a
<pb n="165"/><anchor id="Pg165"/>
very old one. He thought of all the true penitents
who had knocked for admission at its door
and had gone through its bloody ordeal with a
zeal of madness which had enabled them to cry
loudly for blows and more blows until they fell
insensible. He tried to imagine their state of
mind, but he could not. He was of their race
and a growth of the same soil, but an alien civilization
had touched him and sundered him from
them, yet without taking him for its own. He
could only nerve himself to face this ordeal because
it would serve his one great purpose.</p>

<p>As he stood there, a curious half-irrelevant
thought came into his mind. He knew that the
marks they would make on his back would be
permanent. He had seen the long rough scars
on the backs of sheep-herders, stripped to the
waist for the hot work of shearing. And he
wondered how he would explain these strange
scars to Julia. He imagined her discovering
them with her long dainty hands, her round white
arms. A great longing surged up in him that
seemed to weaken the very tissues of his body.
He shook himself, threw away his cigarette, went
to the heavy wooden door and knocked.</p>

<p>Now he spoke a rigamarole in Spanish which
had been taught him by rote.</p>

<p><q>God knocks at this mission&rsquo;s door for His
clemency,</q> he called.</p>
<pb n="166"/><anchor id="Pg166"/>

<p>From within came a deep-voiced chorus, the
first sound he had heard from the house, seeming
weirdly to be the voice of the house itself.</p>

<p><q>Penance, penance, which seeks salvation!</q> it
chanted.</p>

<p><q>Saint Peter will open to me the gate, bathing
me with the light, in the name of Mary, with the
seal of Jesus,</q> Ramon went on, repeating as he
had learned. <q>I ask this confraternity. Who
gives this house light?</q></p>

<p><q>Jesus,</q> answered the chorus within.</p>

<p><q>Who fills it with joy?</q></p>

<p><q>Mary.</q></p>

<p><q>Who preserves it with faith?</q></p>

<p><q>Joseph!</q></p>

<p>The door opened and Ramon entered the
chapel room of the <hi rend="font-style: italic">Morada</hi>.
It was lighted by a
single candle, which revealed dimly the rough
earthen walls, the low roof raftered with round
pine logs, the wooden benches and the altar,
covered with black cloth. This was decorated
with figures of the skull and cross-bones cut from
white cloth. A human skull stood on either side
of it, and a small wooden crucifix hung on the wall
above it. The solitary candle&mdash;an ordinary
tallow one in a tin holder&mdash;stood before this.</p>

<p>The men were merely dark human shapes.
The light did not reveal their faces. They said
nothing to Ramon. He could scarcely believe
<pb n="167"/><anchor id="Pg167"/>
that these were the same good-natured
<hi rend="font-style: italic">pelados</hi>
he had known by day. Indeed they were not the
same, but were now merely units of this organization
which held them in bondage of fear and awe.</p>

<p>One of them took Ramon silently by the arm
and led him through a low door into the other
room which was the <hi rend="font-style: italic">Morada</hi>
proper. This
room was supposed never to be entered except by
a member of the order or by a candidate. It was
small and low as the other, furnished only with a
few benches about the wall, and lighted by a
couple of candles on a small table. A very old
and tarnished oil painting of Mary with the Babe
hung at one end of it. All the way around the
room, hanging from pegs driven into the wall,
was a row of the broad heavy braided lashes of
<hi rend="font-style: italic">amole</hi> weed, called
<hi rend="font-style: italic">disciplinas</hi>, used in Holy
Week, and of the blood-stained drawers worn on
that occasion by the flagellants.</p>

<p>Still in complete silence Ramon was forced to
his knees by two of the men, who quickly stripped
him to the waist. Beside him stood a tall powerfully-built
Mexican with his right arm bared. In
his hand he held a triangular bit of white quartz,
cleverly chipped to a cutting edge. This man
was the <hi rend="font-style: italic">sangredor</hi>,
whose duty it was to place the
seal of the order upon the penitent&rsquo;s back. His
office required no little skill, for he had to make
three cuts the whole length of the back and three
<pb n="168"/><anchor id="Pg168"/>
the width, tearing through the skin so as to leave
a permanent scar, but not deep enough to injure
the muscle. Ramon, glancing up, saw the gleam
of the candle light on the white quartz, and also
in the eyes of the man, which were bright with
eagerness.</p>

<p>Now came the supreme struggle with himself.
How could he go through with this ugly agony?
He longed to leap to his feet and fight these
ignorant louts, who were going to mangle him
and beat him for their own amusement. He
held himself down with all his will, striving to
think of the girl, to hold his purpose before his
mind, to endure.&hellip;</p>

<p>He felt the hand of the
<hi rend="font-style: italic">sangredor</hi> upon his
neck, and gritted his teeth. The man&rsquo;s grip was
heavy, hot and firm. A flash of pain shot up and
down his back with lightning speed, as though a
red hot poker had been laid upon it. Again and
again and again! Six times in twice as many
seconds the deft flint ripped his skin, and he fell
forward upon his hands, faint and sick, as he
felt his own blood welling upon his back and
trickling in warm rivulets between his ribs.</p>

<p>But this was not all. To qualify, he knew, he
must call for the lash of his own free will.</p>

<p><q>For the love of God,</q> he uttered painfully,
as he had been taught, <q>the three meditations of
the passion of our Lord.</q></p>
<pb n="169"/><anchor id="Pg169"/>

<p>On his torn back a long black snake whip came
down, wielded with merciless force. But he felt
the full agony of the first blow only. The second
seemed faint, and the third sent him plunging
downward through a red mist into black nothingness.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC24" type="chapter">
<pb n="170"/><anchor id="Pg170"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER XXIV</hi>
</head>

<p>A few days later one bright morning Ramon
was sitting in the sun before the door of his
friend, Francisco Guiterrez, feeling still somewhat
sore, but otherwise surprisingly well. Guiterrez,
a young sheep-herder, held the position
of <hi rend="font-style: italic">coadjutor</hi> of the
local <hi rend="font-style: italic">penitente</hi> chapter, and
one of his duties as such was to take the penitent
to his house and care for him after the initiation.
He had washed Ramon&rsquo;s wounds in a tea made
by boiling Romero weed. This was a remedy
which the <hi rend="font-style: italic">penitentes</hi>
had used for centuries, and
its efficacy was proved by the fact that Ramon&rsquo;s
cuts had begun to heal at once, and that he had
had very little fever.</p>

<p>For a couple of days Ramon had been forced
to lie restlessly in the only bed of the Guiterrez
establishment. The Senora Guiterrez, a pretty
buxom young Mexican woman, had fed him on
<hi rend="font-style: italic">atole</hi> gruel and
on all of the eggs which her small
flock of scrub hens produced; the seven little dirty
brown Guiterrez children had come in to marvel
at him with their fingers in their mouths; the
Guiterrez goats and dogs and chickens had
<pb n="171"/><anchor id="Pg171"/>
wandered in and out of the room in a companionable
way, as though seeking to make him feel
at ease; and Guiterrez himself had spent his
evenings sitting beside Ramon, smoking cigarettes
and talking.</p>

<p>This time of idleness had not been wholly wasted,
either, for it had come out in the course of
conversation that Guiterrez had been offered a
thousand dollars for his place by a man whom he
did not know, but whom Ramon had easily identified
as an agent of MacDougall. Tempted by
an amount which he could scarcely conceive,
Guiterrez was thinking seriously of accepting the
offer.</p>

<p>Now that he had won over Alfego and had
gotten the influence of the
<hi rend="font-style: italic">penitentes</hi> on his side,
Ramon&rsquo;s one remaining object was to defeat just
such deals as this, which MacDougall already
had under way. He intended to stir up feeling
against the gringos, and to persuade the Mexicans
not to sell. Later, such lands as he needed
in order to control the right-of-way, he would
gain by lending money and taking mortgages.
But he did not intend to cheat any one. Such
Mexicans as he had to oust from their lands, he
would locate elsewhere. He was filled with a
large generosity, and with a real love for these,
his people. He meant to dominate this country,
<pb n="172"/><anchor id="Pg172"/>
but his pride demanded that no one should be
poor or hungry in his domain. So now he argued
the matter to Guiterrez with real sincerity.</p>

<p><q>A thousand dollars?
<hi rend="font-style: italic">Por Dios</hi>, man! Don&rsquo;t
you know that this place is worth many thousand
dollars to you?</q></p>

<p><q>How can it be worth many thousand?</q>
Guiterrez demanded. <q>What have I here? A
few acres of chile and corn, a little hay, some
range for my goats, a few cherry trees, a house.&hellip;
Many thousands? No.</q></p>

<p><q>You have here a home,
<hi rend="font-style: italic">amigo</hi>,</q> Ramon reminded
him. <q>Do you know how long a thousand
dollars would support you? A year, perhaps.
Then you would have to work for other
men the rest of your life. Here you are free
and independent.</q></p>

<p>Guiterrez said nothing, but he had obviously
received a new idea, and was impressed. Ramon
never returned to the direct argument, but he
missed no chance to stimulate Guiterrez&rsquo;s pride
in his establishment.</p>

<p><q>This is a good little house you have
<hi rend="font-style: italic">amigo</hi>,</q>
he would observe. And Guiterrez would tell
him that the house had been built by his grandfather,
but that its walls were as firm as ever,
and that he had been intending for several years
to plaster it, but had never gotten time. Before
<pb n="173"/><anchor id="Pg173"/>
he was out of bed, Ramon was reasonably sure
that Guiterrez would never sell.</p>

<p>The house was indeed charmingly situated on a
hillside at the foot of which a little clear trout
stream, called Rio Gallinas, chuckled over the
bright pebbles in its bed and ran to hide in thickets
of willow.</p>

<p>Sitting on the <hi rend="font-style: italic">portal</hi>,
which ran the length of
the house and consisted of a projection of the roof
supported by rough pine logs, Ramon could look
down the canyon to where it widened into a little
valley that lost itself in the vast levels of the
<hi rend="font-style: italic">mesa</hi>. There thirsty
sands swallowed the stream
and not a sprig of green marred the harmony of
grey and purple swimming in vivid light, reaching
away to the horizon where faint blue mountains
hung in drooping lines.</p>

<p>By turning his head, Ramon could look into
the heart of the mountains whence the stream issued
through a narrow canyon, with steep, forested
ridges on either side, and little level glades
along the water, set with tall, conical blue spruce
trees, pines with their warm red boles, and little
clumps of aspen with gleaming white stems, and
trembling leaves of mingled gold and green.</p>

<p>Ramon spent many hours with his back against
the wall, his knees drawn up under his chin, Mexican
fashion, smoking and vaguely dreaming of
<pb n="174"/><anchor id="Pg174"/>
the girl he loved and of the things he would do.
The vast sun drenched landscape before him was
too much a part of his life, too intimate a thing
for him to appreciate its beauty, but after his
struggles with doubt and desire, it filled him with
an unaccountable contentment. Its warmth and
brightness, its unchanging serenity, its ceaseless
soft voices of wind and water, lulled his mind and
comforted his senses. The country was like some
great purring creature that let him lie in its
bosom and filled his body with the warm steady
throb of its untroubled strength.</p>

<p>After a week of recuperation, he bought a
horse from Guiterrez for a pack animal, loaded
it with bedding and provisions and rode away
into the mountains. His task was now to find
other men who had fallen under the influence of
MacDougall, and to persuade them not to sell
their lands. Some of them would be at their
homes, but others would be with the sheep herds,
scattered here and there in the high country.
He faced long days of mountain wandering, and
for all that he longed to be done with his task,
this part of it was sweet to him.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC25" type="chapter">
<pb n="175"/><anchor id="Pg175"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER XXV</hi>
</head>

<p>These were days of power and success, days of
a glamour that lingered long in his mind. Beyond
a doubt he was destroying MacDougall&rsquo;s
plan and realizing his own. Sometimes he met
a surly Mexican who would not listen to him, but
nearly always he won the man over in the end.
He was amazed at his own resourcefulness and
eloquence. It seemed as though some inhibition
in him had been broken down, some magical elixir
poured into his imagination. He found that he
could literally take a sheep camp by storm, entering
into the life of the men, telling them stories,
singing them songs, passing out presents of
tobacco and whisky, often delivering a wildly
applauded harangue on the necessity for all Mexicans
to act together against the gringos, who
would otherwise soon own the country. Never
once did he think of the incongruity of thus fanning
the flames of race hatred for the love of a
girl with grey eyes and yellow hair.</p>

<p>He did not always reach a house or a sheep
camp at night. Many a time he camped alone,
catching trout for his supper from a mountain
stream, and going to sleep to the lonely music of
<pb n="176"/><anchor id="Pg176"/>
running water in a wilderness. At such times
many a man would have lost faith in himself,
would have feared his crimes and lost his hopes.
But to Ramon this loneliness was an old friend.
Like all who have lived much out-of-doors he was
at heart a pantheist, and felt more at peace and
unity with wild nature than ever he had with men.</p>

<p>But there was one such night when he felt
troubled. As he rode up the Tusas Canyon at
twilight, a sense of insecurity came over him,
amounting almost to fear. He had had a somewhat
similar feeling once when a panther had
trailed him on a winter night. Now, as then, he
had no idea what it was that menaced him; he
was simply warned by that sixth sense which
belongs to all wild things, and to men in whom
there remains something of the feral. His horses
shared his unrest. When he picketed them, just
before dark, they fed uneasily, stopping now and
then to stand like statues with lifted heads, testing
the wind with their nostrils, moving their ears to
catch some sound beyond human perception.</p>

<p>When he had eaten his supper and made his
bed, Ramon took the little automatic revolver out
of its scabbard and went down the canyon a
quarter of a mile, slipping along in the shadow of
the brush that lined the banks of the stream.
This was necessary because a half-moon made the
open glades bright. He paused and peered a
<pb n="177"/><anchor id="Pg177"/>
dozen times. So cautious were his movements
that he came within forty feet of a drinking deer,
and was badly startled when it bounded away with
a snort and a smashing of brush. But he saw
nothing dangerous and went back to his camp and
to bed. There he lay awake for an hour, still
troubled, oppressed by a vague feeling of the
littleness and insecurity of human life.</p>

<p>A long, rippling snort of fear from his saddle
horse, picketed near his bed, awakened him and
probably saved his life. When he opened his
eyes, he saw the figure of a man standing directly
over him. He was about to speak, when the man
lifted his arms, swinging upward a heavy club.
With quick presence of mind, Ramon jerked the
blankets and the heavy canvas tarpaulin about his
head, at the same time rolling over. The club
came down with crushing force on his right
shoulder. He continued to roll and flounder with
all his might, going down a sharp slope toward
the creek which was only a few yards away.
Twice more he felt the club, once on his arm and
once on his ribs, but his head escaped and the
heavy blankets protected his body.</p>

<p>The next thing he knew, he had gone over the
bank of the creek, which was several feet high in
that place, and lay in the shallow icy water.
Meantime he had gotten his hand on the automatic
pistol. He now jerked upright and fired at the
<pb n="178"/><anchor id="Pg178"/>
form of his assailant, which bulked above him.
The man disappeared. For a moment Ramon sat
still. He heard footsteps, and something like a
grunt or a groan. Then he extricated himself
from the cold, sodden blankets, climbed upon the
bank, and began cautiously searching about, with
his weapon ready. He found the club&mdash;a heavy
length of green spruce-and put his hand accidentally
on something wet, which he ascertained by
smelling it to be blood.</p>

<p>He was shivering with cold and badly bruised
in several places, but he was afraid to build a fire.
In case his enemy were not badly injured or had a
companion, that would have been risking another
attack. He stood in the shadow of a spruce,
stamping his feet and rubbing himself, acutely uncomfortable,
waiting for daylight and wondering
what this attack meant. He doubted whether
MacDougall would have countenanced such tactics,
but it might well have been an agent of MacDougall
acting on his own responsibility. Or it
might have been some one sent by old Archulera.
Then, too, there were many poor connections of
the Delcasar family who would profit by his death.</p>

<p>As he stood there in the dark, shivering and
miserable, the idea of death was not hard for him
to conceive. He realized that but for the snort
of the saddle horse he would now be lying under
the tree with the top of his head crushed in. The
<pb n="179"/><anchor id="Pg179"/>
man would probably have dragged his body into
the thick timber and left it. There he would have
lain and rotted. Or perhaps the coyotes would
have eaten him and the buzzards afterward picked
his bones. He shuddered. Despite his acute
misery, life had never seemed more desirable.
He thought of sunlight and warmth, of good food
and of the love of women, and these things seemed
more sweet than ever before. He realized, for
the first time, too, that he faced many dangers
and that the chance of death walked with him all
the time. He resolved fiercely that he would
beat all his enemies, that he would live and have
his desires which were so sweet to him.</p>

<p>Daylight came at last, showing him first the
rim of the mountain serrated with spruce tops,
and then lighting the canyon, revealing his disordered
camp and his horses grazing quietly in
the open. He went immediately and examined
the ground where the struggle had taken place.
A plain trail of blood lead away from the place,
as he had expected. He formed a plan of action
immediately.</p>

<p>First he made a great fire, dried and warmed
himself, cooked and ate his breakfast, drinking a
full pint of hot coffee. Then he rolled up all his
belongings, hid them in the bushes, and picketed
his horses in a side canyon where the grass was
good. When these preparations were complete,
<pb n="180"/><anchor id="Pg180"/>
he took the trail of blood and followed it with the
utmost care. He carried his weapon cocked in
his hand, and always before he went around a
bend in the canyon, or passed through a clump of
trees, he paused and looked long and carefully,
like an animal stalking dangerous prey.</p>

<p>At last, from the cover of some willows, he saw
a man sitting beside the creek. The man was
half-naked, and was binding up his leg with some
strips torn from his dirty shirt. He was a Mexican
of the lowest and most brutal type, with a
swarthy skin, black hair and a bullet-shaped head.
Ramon walked toward him.</p>

<p><q><hi rend="font-style: italic">Buenas Dias,
amigo</hi>,</q> he saluted.</p>

<p>The man looked up with eyes full of patient
suffering, like the eyes of a hurt animal. He did
not seem either surprised or frightened. He
nodded and went on binding up his leg.</p>

<p>Ramon watched him a minute. He saw that
the man was weak from loss of blood. There
was a great patch of dried blood on the ground
beside him, now beginning to flake and curl in
the sun.</p>

<p><q>I will come back in a minute, friend,</q> he said.</p>

<p>He went back to his camp, saddled his horses,
putting some food in the saddle pockets. When
he returned, the Mexican sat in exactly the same
place with his back against a rock and his legs and
<pb n="181"/><anchor id="Pg181"/>
arms inert. Ramon fried bacon and made coffee
for him. He had to help the man put the food in
his mouth and hold a cup for him to drink.
Afterward, with great difficulty, he loaded the
man on his saddle horse, where he sat heavily,
clutching the pommel with both hands. Ramon
mounted the pack horse bareback.</p>

<p><q>Where do you live, friend?</q> Ramon asked.</p>

<p><q>Tusas,</q> the Mexican replied, naming a little
village ten miles down the canyon.</p>

<p>They exchanged no other words until they came
within sight of the group of
<hi rend="font-style: italic">adobe</hi> houses. Then
Ramon stopped his horse and turned to the man.</p>

<p><q>You were hunting,</q> he told him slowly and
impressively, <q>and you dropped your gun and shot
yourself. <hi rend="font-style: italic">Sabes?</hi></q></p>

<p>The man nodded.</p>

<p><q>How much were you paid to kill me, friend?</q>
Ramon then asked.</p>

<p>The man looked at the pommel of the saddle,
and his swarthy face darkened with a heavy flush.</p>

<p><q>One hundred dollars,</q> he admitted. <q>I
needed the money to christen a child. Could I
let my child go to hell? But I did not mean to
kill you. Only to beat you, so you would go away.
Do not ask who sent me, for the love of
God.&hellip;</q></p>

<p><q>I ask nothing more, friend,</q> Ramon assured
<pb n="182"/><anchor id="Pg182"/>
him. <q>And since you were to have a hundred
dollars for making me leave the country, here is a
hundred dollars for not succeeding.</q></p>

<p>Both of them laughed. Ramon then rode on
and delivered the man to his excited and grateful
wife. He went back to his camp very weary and
sore, but feeling that he had done an excellent
stroke of work for his purpose.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC26" type="chapter">
<pb n="183"/><anchor id="Pg183"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER XXVI</hi>
</head>

<p>After this occurrence his success among the
humbler Mexicans was more marked than ever,
but some of the men of property who had been
subsidized by MacDougall were not so easily won
over. Such a case was that of old Pedro Alcatraz
who owned a little store in the town of Vallecitos,
a bit of land and a few thousand sheep. Alcatraz
was a tall boney old man, and was of nearly pure
Navajo Indian blood, as one could tell by the
queer crinkled character of his beard and moustache,
which were like those of a chinaman. He
was simple and direct like an Indian, too, lacking
the Mexican talent for lying and artifice. In his
own town he was a petty czar, like Alfego, but on
a much smaller scale. By reason of being
<hi rend="font-style: italic">Hermano Mayor</hi>
of the local <hi rend="font-style: italic">penitente</hi> chapter,
and of having most of the people in his own neighbourhood
in debt to him, he had considerable
power. He was advising men to sell their lands,
and was lending more money on land than it was
reasonable to suppose he owned. Beyond a
doubt, he had been won by MacDougall&rsquo;s dollars.</p>

<p>Ramon found Alcatraz unresponsive. The
old man listened to a long harangue on the subject
<pb n="184"/><anchor id="Pg184"/>
of the race issue without a word of reply, and
without looking up. Ramon then played what
should have been his strongest card.</p>

<p><q>My friend,</q> he said, <q>you may not know it,
but I am your brother in the blood of Christ.
Do I not then deserve better of you than a gringo
who is trying to take this country away from the
Mexican people?</q></p>

<p><q>Yes,</q> the old man answered quietly, <q>I know
you are a <hi rend="font-style: italic">penitente</hi>,
and I know why. Do you
think that I am a fool like these
<hi rend="font-style: italic">pelados</hi> that herd
my sheep? You wear the scars of a
<hi rend="font-style: italic">penitente</hi>
because you think it will help you to make money
and to do what you want. You are just like
MacDougall, except that he uses money and you
use words. A poor man can only choose his
masters, and for my part I have more use for
money than for words.</q> So saying, the blunt old
savage walked to the other end of his store and
began showing a Mexican woman some shawls.</p>

<p>Ramon went away, breathing hard with rage,
slapping his quirt against his boots. He would
show that old <hi rend="font-style: italic">cabron</hi>
who was boss in these
mountains!</p>

<p>He went immediately and hired the little
<hi rend="font-style: italic">adobe</hi>
hall which is found in every Mexican town of
more than a hundred inhabitants, and made preparations
to give a <hi rend="font-style: italic">baile</hi>.</p>

<p>To give a dance is the surest and simplest way
<pb n="185"/><anchor id="Pg185"/>
to win popularity in a Mexican town, and Ramon
spared no expense to make this affair a success.
He sent forty miles across the mountains for two
fiddlers to help out the blind man who was the
only local musician. He arranged a feast, and in
a back room he installed a small keg of native
wine and one of beer.</p>

<p>The invitation was general and every one who
could possibly reach the place in a day&rsquo;s journey
came. The women wore for the most part calico
dresses, bright in colour and generous in volume,
heavily starched and absolutely devoid of fit.
Their brown faces were heavily powdered, producing
in some of the darker ones a purplish tint,
which was ghastly in the light of the oil lamps.
Some of the younger girls were comely despite
their crude toilets, with soft skins, ripe breasts,
mild dark heifer-like eyes, and pretty teeth showing
in delighted grins. The men wore the cheap
ready-made suits which have done so much to
make Americans look alike everywhere, but they
achieved a degree of originality by choosing
brighter colours than men generally wear, being
especially fond of brilliant electric blues and rich
browns. Their broad but often handsome faces
were radiant with smiles, and their thick black
hair was wetted and greased into shiny order.</p>

<p>The dance started with difficulty, despite symptoms
of eagerness on all hands. Bashful youths
<pb n="186"/><anchor id="Pg186"/>
stalled and crowded in the doorway like a log jam
in the river. Bashful girls, seated all around the
room, nudged and tittered and then became
solemn and self-conscious. Each number was
preceded by a march, several times around the
room, which was sedate and formal in the extreme.
The favourite dance was a fast, hopping waltz,
in which the swain seized his partner firmly in both
hands under the arms and put her through a
vigorous test of wind and agility. The floor was
rough and sanded, and the rasping of feet almost
drowned the music. There were long Virginia
reels, led with peremptory dash by a master of
ceremonies, full of grace and importance.
Swarthy faces were bedewed with sweat and dark
eyes glowed with excitement, but there was never
the slightest relaxation of the formalism of the
affair. For this dance in an earthen hovel on a
plank floor was the degenerate but lineal descendant
of the splendid and formal balls which the
Dons had held in the old days, when New Spain
belonged to its proud and wealthy conquerors;
it was the wistful and grotesque remnant of a
dying order.</p>

<p>Ramon had a vague realization of this fact as
he watched the affair. It stirred a sort of sentimental
pity in him. But he threw off that
feeling, he had work to do. He entered into the
spirit of the thing, dancing with every woman on
<pb n="187"/><anchor id="Pg187"/>
the floor. He took the men in groups to the
back room and treated them. He missed no
opportunity to get in a word against the gringos,
and incidentally against those Mexicans who betrayed
their fellows by advising them to sell their
lands. He never mentioned Alcatraz by name,
but he made it clear enough to whom he referred.</p>

<p>Late in the evening, when all were mellowed
by drink and excited by dancing, he gained the
attention of the gathering on the pretext of announcing
a special dance, and boldly gave a harangue
in which he urged all Mexicans to stick
together against the gringos, and above all not
to sell their homes which their fathers had won
from the barbarians, and were the foundations of
their prosperity and freedom.</p>

<p><q>Remember,</q> he urged them in a burst of eloquence
that surprised himself, <q>that in your veins
is the blood of conquerors&mdash;blood which was
poured out on these hills and valleys to win them
from the Indians, precious blood which has made
this land priceless to you for all time!</q></p>

<p>His speech was greeted with a burst of applause
unquestionably spontaneous. It filled him with
a sense of power that was almost intoxicating.
In the town he might be neglected, despised,
picked for an easy mark, but here among his
own people he was a ruler and leader by birth.</p>

<p>The most important result of the
<hi rend="font-style: italic">baile</hi> was that
<pb n="188"/><anchor id="Pg188"/>
it won over the stubborn Alcatraz. He did not
attend it, but he knew what happened there. He
realized that advice in favour of selling land would
not be popular in that section for a long time,
and he acknowledged his defeat by inviting Ramon
to dinner at his house, and driving a shrewd
bargain with him, whereby he gave his influence
in exchange for certain grazing privileges.</p>

<p>On his way home a few days later Ramon
looked back at the mountains with the feeling
that they belonged to him by right of conquest.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC27" type="chapter">
<pb n="189"/><anchor id="Pg189"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER XXVII</hi>
</head>

<p>A week later Ramon was driving across the
<hi rend="font-style: italic">mesa</hi> west of town,
bound for the state capital.
He was following the same route that Diego
Delcasar had followed on the day of his death,
and he passed within a few miles of Archulera&rsquo;s
ranch; but no thought either of his uncle or of
Archulera entered his mind. For in his pocket
was a letter consisting of a single sentence hastily
scrawled in a large round upright hand on lavender-scented
note paper. The sentence was:</p>

<milestone unit="tb"/>

<p><q rend="post: none">Meet you at the
southwest corner of the Plaza Tuesday at seven thirty.</q></p>

<p rend="text-align: right; margin-right: 4"><q rend="post:
none">Love,</q></p>

<p rend="text-align: right; margin-right: 2"><q>J. R.</q></p>

<milestone unit="tb"/>

<p>A great deal of trouble and anxiety had preceded
the receipt of that message. First he had
written her a letter that was unusually long and
exuberant for him, telling her of his success and
that now he was ready to come and get her in
accordance with their agreement, suggesting a
time and place. Three days of cumulative doubt
and agony had gone by without a reply. Then he
had tried to reach her by long distance telephone,
<pb n="190"/><anchor id="Pg190"/>
but without success. Finally he had wired, although
he knew that a telegram is a risky vehicle
for confidential business. Now he had her
answer, the answer that he wanted. His spirit
was released and leapt forward, leaving resentments
and doubts far behind.</p>

<p>It was eighty miles to the state capital, the
road was good all the way, the day bright and
cool. His route lead across the
<hi rend="font-style: italic">mesa</hi>, through
the Scissors Pass, and then north and east along
the foot of the mountains.</p>

<p>Immense and empty the country stretched before
him&mdash;a land of far-flung levels and even
farther mountains; a land which makes even the
sea, with its near horizons, seem little; a land
which has always produced men of daring because
it inspires a sense of freedom without any limit
save what daring sets.</p>

<p>He had dared and won. He was going to
take the sweet price of his daring. The engine
of his big car sang to him a song of victory and
desire. He rejoiced in the sense of power under
his hand. He opened the throttle wider and the
car answered with more speed, licking up the
road like a hungry monster. How easily he
mastered time and distance for his purpose!</p>

<p>He was to have her, she would be his. So
sang the humming motor and the wind in his ears.
Her white arms and her red mouth, her splendid
<pb n="191"/><anchor id="Pg191"/>
eyes that feared and yielded! She was waiting
for him! More speed. He conquered the hills
with a roar of strength to spare, topped the
crests, and sped down the long slopes like a bird
coming to earth.</p>

<p>He was to have her, she would be his. Could
it be true? The great machine that carried him
to their tryst roared an affirmative, the wind sang
of it, his blood quickened with anticipation incredibly
keen. And always the distance that lay
between them was falling behind in long, grey
passive miles.</p>

<p>He had reached his destination a little after
six. As he drove slowly through the streets of
the little dusty town, the mood of exaltation that
had possessed him during the trip died down.
He was intent, worried practical. Having registered
at the hotel, he got a handful of time
tables and made his plans with care. They
would drive to a town twenty-five miles away, be
married, and catch the California Limited.
There would just be time. Once he had her in
his car, nothing could stop them.</p>

<p>The <hi rend="font-style: italic">plaza</hi>
or public square about which the old
town was built, and which had been its market
place in the old days, was now occupied by a neat
little park with a band stand. Retail stores and
banks fronted on three sides of it, but the fourth
was occupied by a long low <hi rend="font-style: italic">adobe</hi> building
<pb n="192"/><anchor id="Pg192"/>
which was very old and had been converted into a
museum of local antiquities. It was dark and
lifeless at night, and in its shadow-filled verandah
he was to meet her.</p>

<p>He had his car parked beside the spot ten minutes
ahead of time. It was slightly cold now,
with a gusty wind whispering about the streets
and tearing big papery leaves from the cottonwood
trees in the park. The <hi rend="font-style: italic">plaza</hi> was empty
save for an occasional passer-by whose quick footfalls
rang sharply in the silence. Here and there
was an illuminated shop window. The drug
store on the opposite corner showed a bright interior,
where two small boys devoured ice cream
sodas with solemn rapture. Somewhere up a
side street a choir was practising a hymn, making
a noise infinitely doleful.</p>

<p>He had a bear-skin to wrap her in, and he
arranged this on the seat beside him and then
tried to wait patiently. He sat very tense and
motionless, except for an occasional glance at his
watch, until it showed exactly seven-thirty.
Then he got out of his car and began walking
first to one side of the corner and then to the
other, for he did not know from which direction
she would come. At twenty-five minutes of eight
he was angry, but in another ten minutes anger
had given way to a dull heavy disappointment
that seemed to hold him by the throat and make
<pb n="193"/><anchor id="Pg193"/>
it difficult to swallow. None-the-less he waited a
full hour before he started up his car and drove
slowly back to the hotel.</p>

<p>On the way he debated with himself whether
he should try to communicate with her tonight or
wait until the next day. He knew that the wisest
thing would be to wait until the next day and send
her a note, but he also knew that he could not
wait. He would find out where she lived, call
her on the telephone, and learn what had
prevented her from keeping the appointment.
He had desperate need to know that something
besides her own will had kept her away.</p>

<p>When he went to the hotel desk, a clerk handed
him a letter.</p>

<p><q>This was here when you registered, I think,</q>
he said. <q>But I didn&rsquo;t know it. I&rsquo;m sorry.</q></p>

<p>When he saw the handwriting of the address
he was filled with commotion. Here, then, was
her explanation. This would tell him why she
had failed him. This, in all probability, would
make all right.</p>

<p>He went to his room to read it, sat down on
the edge of the bed and ripped the envelope open
with an impatient finger. The letter was dated
two days earlier&mdash;the day after she had received
his telegram.</p>

<p><q>I don&rsquo;t know what to say,</q> she
wrote, <q rend="post: none">but it
doesn&rsquo;t matter much. You will despise me anyway,
<pb n="194"/><anchor id="Pg194"/>
and I despise myself. But I can&rsquo;t help it&mdash;honestly
I can&rsquo;t. I meant to keep my
promise and I would have kept it, but they found
your telegram and mother read it&mdash;by mistake,
of course. I ought to have had sense
enough to burn it. You can&rsquo;t imagine how awful
it has been. Mother said the most terrible
things about you, things she had heard. And she
said that I would be ruining my life and hers.
I said I didn&rsquo;t care, because I loved you. I can&rsquo;t
tell you what an awful quarrel we had! And I
wouldn&rsquo;t have given in, but she told Gordon and
he was so terribly angry. He said it was a disgrace
to the family, and he began to cough and
had a hemorrhage and we thought he was going
to die. Mother said he probably would die unless
I gave you up.</q></p>

<p><q rend="post: none">That finished me. I couldn&rsquo;t do anything
after that&mdash;I just couldn&rsquo;t. There was nothing
but misery in sight either way, so what was
the use? I&rsquo;ve lost all my courage and all my
doubts have come back. I do love you&mdash;terribly.
But you are so strange, so different. And
I don&rsquo;t think we would have gotten along or
anything. I try to comfort myself by thinking
it&rsquo;s all for the best, but it doesn&rsquo;t really comfort
me at all. I never knew people could be as
miserable as I am now. I don&rsquo;t think its fair.</q></p>

<p><q rend="post: none">When you get
this I will be on my way to
<pb n="195"/><anchor id="Pg195"/>
New York and nearly there. We are going to
sail for Europe immediately. I will never see
you again. I will always love you.</q></p>

<p rend="text-align: right; margin-right: 1"><q>Julia.</q></p>

<milestone unit="tb"/>

<p>Rage possessed him at first&mdash;the rage of
defeated desire, of injured pride, of a passionate,
undisciplined nature crossed and beaten. He
flung the letter on the floor, and strode up and
down the room, looking about for something to
smash or tear. So she was that kind of a
creature&mdash;a miserable, whimpering fool that
would let an old woman and a sick man rule her!
She was afraid her brother might die. What an
excuse! And he had killed, or at least sanctioned
killing, for her sake. He had poured out his
blood for her. There was nothing he would not
have dared or done to have her. And here she
had the soul of a sheep!</p>

<p>But no&mdash;perhaps that was not it. Perhaps
she had been playing with him all along, had
never had any idea of marrying him&mdash;because he
was a Mexican!</p>

<p>Bitter was this thought, but it died as his anger
died. Something that sat steady and clear inside
of him told him that he was a fool. He was
reading the letter again, and he knew it was all
truth. <q>There was nothing but misery in sight
either way,</q> she had written.</p>
<pb n="196"/><anchor id="Pg196"/>

<p>Suddenly he understood; suffering and an
awakened imagination had given him insight.
For the first time in his life, he realized the feelings
of another. He realized how much he had
asked of this girl, who had all her life been ruled,
who had never tasted freedom nor practised self-reliance.
He saw now that she had rebelled and
had fought against the forces and fears that oppress
youth, as had he, and that she had been bewildered
and overcome.</p>

<p>His anger was gone. All hot emotion was
gone. In its place was a great loneliness, tinged
with pity. He looked at the letter again. Its
handwriting showed signs of disturbance in the
writer, but she had not forgotten to scent it with
that faint delightful perfume which was forever
associated in his mind with her. It summoned
the image of her with a vividness he could not
bear.</p>

<p>But courage and pride are not killed at a blow.
He threw the letter aside and shook himself
sharply, like a man just awake trying to shake off
the memory of a nightmare. She was gone, she
was lost. Well, what of it? There were many
other women in the world, many beautiful women.
And he was strong now, successful. One woman
could not hurt him by her refusal. He tried resolutely
to put her out of his mind, and to think
of his business, of his plans. But these things
<pb n="197"/><anchor id="Pg197"/>
which had glowed so brightly in his imagination
just a few hours before were suddenly as dead as
cinders. He knew that he cared little for dollars
and lands in themselves. His nature demanded
a romantic object, and this love had given it to
him. Love had found him a wretch and a weakling,
and had made him suddenly strong and
ruthless, bringing out all the colours of his being,
dark and bright, making life suddenly intense and
purposeful.</p>

<p>And she had meant so much to him besides
love. To have won her would have been to win
a great victory over the gringos&mdash;over that
civilization, alien to him in race and temper,
which antagonized and yet fascinated him, with
which he was forced to grapple for his life.</p>

<p>She was gone, he had lost her. Perhaps it was
just as well, after all, he told himself, speaking
out of his pride and his courage. But in his
heart was a great bitterness. In his heart he
felt that the gringos had beaten one more Delcasar.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC28" type="chapter">
<pb n="198"/><anchor id="Pg198"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER XXVIII</hi>
</head>

<p>The next few days Ramon spent quietly and
systematically drinking whisky. This he did
partly because he had a notion that it was an appropriate
thing to do under the circumstances,
and partly because he had a genuine need for
something to jolt his mind out of its rut of misery.
He was not sociable in his cups, and did not seek
company of either sex, inviting a man to drink
with him or accepting such an invitation only
when he had to do so. His favourite resort was
the Silver Dollar Saloon, which was furnished
with tables set between low partitions, so that
when he had one of these booths to himself he
enjoyed a considerable degree of isolation. He
drank carefully, like a Spaniard, never losing
control of his feet or of his eyes, taking always
just enough to keep his mind away from realities
and filled with dreams. In these dreams
Julia played a vivid and delightful part. He
imagined himself encountering her under all sorts
of circumstances, and always she was yielding,
repentant, she was his. In a dozen different
ways he conquered her, taking in imagination, as
men have always done, what the reality had denied.
<pb n="199"/><anchor id="Pg199"/>
Some of his fancies were delightful and
filled him with a sense of triumph, so that men
glanced curiously at the bright-eyed boy who sat
there in his corner all alone, absorbed and intent.
But there were other times at night when his defeated
desire came and lay in his arms like an
invisible unyielding succuba, torturing, maddening,
driving him back to the street to drink until
drunken sleep came with its sudden brutal mercy.</p>

<p>But after a few days alcohol began to have little
effect upon him, except that when he awoke his
hands were all aflutter so that he spilled his coffee
and tore his newspaper. He felt sick and weary,
his misery numbed by many repetitions of its every
twinge. A sure instinct urged him to get out of
the town and into the mountains, but he hated to
go alone and lacked the initiative to start. He
had a friend in the capital named Curtis, who was
half Mexican and half Irish. This young man
was a dealer in mules and horses, and he had a
herd of some twenty head to take across the mountains
about sixty miles. Badly in need of a helper
and unable to hire one, he asked Ramon to go
with him. The proposition was accepted with relief
but without enthusiasm.</p>

<p>Trouble started immediately. The horses were
only half broken, and the one they chose for a pack
animal rebelled ten miles from town and bucked
the pack off, scattering tin dishes, sides of bacon,
<pb n="200"/><anchor id="Pg200"/>
loaves of bread and cans of condensed milk all
over a quarter of a mile of rough country. They
rounded up the recalcitrant in a pouring rain, and
made a wet and miserable camp, sleeping the sleep
of exhaustion in sodden blankets. The next
morning the pack horse opened the exercises by
rolling down a steep bank into the creek, plastering
himself on the way from head to tail with a
half gallon of high grade sorghum syrup which
had been on top of the load. At this Ramon&rsquo;s
tortured nerves exploded and he jumped into the
water after the floundering animal, belabouring it
with a quirt, and cursing it richly in two languages.</p>

<p>He then put a slip noose around its upper lip
and led it unmercifully, while Curtis encouraged
it from behind with a rope-end. Like all Mexicans,
they had little sympathy for horseflesh.</p>

<p>These labours and hardships were Ramon&rsquo;s
salvation. The exercise and air restored his
health and in fighting the difficulties of unlucky
travel he relieved in some degree the rage against
life that embittered him.</p>

<p>When he got back to his room in the hotel he
felt measurably at peace, though weary in mind
and body. He came across Julia&rsquo;s letter, and the
sight and scent of it struck him a sharp painful
blow, but he did not pause now to savour his pain;
he tore the letter into small pieces and threw it
<pb n="201"/><anchor id="Pg201"/>
away. Then he got out his car and started for
home.</p>

<p>He went back beaten over the same road that he
had followed in the moment of his highest hope,
when life had seemed about to keep all the
wonderful promises it whispers in the ear of youth.
But strangely this trip was not the sad and sentimental
affair it should have been. His rugged
health had largely recovered from the shock of
disappointment and dissipation, an excellent breakfast
was digesting within him, the sky was bright
as polished turquoise and the ozonous west wind,
which is the very breath of hope, played sweetly in
his face. He began to discover various consoling
conditions in his lot, which had seemed so intolerable
just a few days before.</p>

<p>Probably no man under forty ever lost a woman
without feeling in some degree compensated by a
sense of freedom regained, and in the man of
solitary and self-reliant nature, to whom freedom
is a boon if not a necessity, this feeling is not slow
to assert itself. Moreover, Ramon was now
caught in the inevitable reaction from a purpose
which had gathered and concentrated his energies
with passionate intensity for almost four months.
During that time he had lived with taut nerves for
a single hope; he had turned away from a dozen
alluring by-paths; he had known that absorbed
<pb n="202"/><anchor id="Pg202"/>
singleness of purpose which belongs only to lovers,
artists and other monomaniacs.</p>

<p>The bright hope that had led him had suddenly
exploded, leaving him stunned and flat for a
time. Now he got to his feet and looked about.
He realized that the world still lay before him, a
place of wonderful promise and possibility, and
apparently he could stray in any direction he chose.
He had money and freedom and an excellent
equipment of appetites and curiosities. Things
he had dreamed of doing long ago, in case he
should ever come into his wealth, now revisited
his imagination. He had promised himself for
one thing some hunting trips&mdash;long ones into the
mountains and down the river in his car. Gambling
had always fascinated him, and he had
longed to sit in a game high enough to be really
interesting, instead of the quarter-limit affair that
he had always played before. And there were
women &hellip; other women. And he meant to go
to New York or Chicago sometime and sample
the fleshpots of a really great city.&hellip; Life
after all was still an interesting thing.</p>

<p>Not that he forgot his serious purposes. He
meant to open a law office, to cultivate his political
connections, to pursue his conquest of Arriba
County. But although he did not realize it, his
plans for making himself a strong and secure position
in life had lost their vitalizing purpose. All
<pb n="203"/><anchor id="Pg203"/>
of these things he would do, but there was no hurry
about them. His desire now was to taste the
sweetness of life, and to rest. He was without a
strong acquisitive impulse, and now that his great
purpose in making money was gone, these projects
did not strongly engage his imagination. He had
plenty of money. He refused to worry. He
felt reckless, too. If he had lost his great hope,
his reward was to be released from the discipline
it had imposed.</p>

<p>Nor was there any other discipline to take its
place. If there had been a strong creative impulse
in him, or if he had faced a real struggle for his
life or his personal freedom, he might now have
recovered that condition of trained and focussed
energy which civilized life demands of men. But
he was too primitive to be engaged by any purely
intellectual purpose, and his money was a buffer
between him and struggle imposed from without.</p>

<p>As he thought of all the things he would do, he
felt strong and sure of himself. He thought that
he was now a shrewd, cynical man, who could not
be deceived or imposed upon, who could take the
good things of life and discount the disillusionments.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC29" type="chapter">
<pb n="204"/><anchor id="Pg204"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER XXIX</hi>
</head>

<p>One of his first acts in town was to negotiate a
note at the bank for several thousand dollars.
This was necessary because he had little cash and
would not have much until spring, when he would
sell lambs and shear his sheep. He not only
needed money for himself, but his mother and
sister, after many lean years, were eager to spend.</p>

<p>He drove out to see Catalina, and found her
big with child and utterly indifferent to him, which
piqued him slightly and relieved him a great deal.
She had heard nothing about her father, and
Ramon sent Cortez out to Domingo Canyon to see
what had become of the old man. Cortez
reported the place deserted. Ramon made
inquiry in town and learned that Archulera had
been seen there in his absence, very much dressed-up
and very drunk, followed by a crowd of young
Mexicans who were evidently parasites on his
newly-acquired wealth. Then he had disappeared,
and some thought he had gone to
Denver. It was evident that his five thousand
dollars had proved altogether too much for him.</p>

<p>Ramon now hung out a shingle, announcing
himself as an attorney-at-law. Of course, no
<pb n="205"/><anchor id="Pg205"/>
business came to him. The right way to get a
practice would have been to go back to the office
of Green or some other established lawyer for
several years. But Ramon had no idea of doing
anything so tiresome and so relatively humiliating.
The idea of running errands for Green
again was repugnant to him.</p>

<p>He went every morning to his office and for a
while he took a certain amount of satisfaction in
merely sitting there, reading the local papers,
smoking a cigar, now and then taking down one
of his text books and reading a little. But study
as such had absolutely no appeal to him. He
might have dug at the dry case books to good
purpose if he had been driven by need, but as it
was he would begin to yawn in ten or fifteen
minutes, and then would put the book away. He
went home to a noonday dinner rather early and
came back in the afternoon, feeling sleepy and
bored. Now the office, and indeed the whole
town, seemed a dreary place to him. At this
season of the year there were often high winds
which mantled the town in a yellow cloud of sand,
and rattled at every loose shutter and door with
futile dreary persistence. Ramon would wander
about the office for a little while with his hands
in his pockets and stare out the window, feeling
depressed, thoughts of his disappointment coming
back to him bitterly. Then he would take his
<pb n="206"/><anchor id="Pg206"/>
hat and go out and look for some one to play
pool with him. Often he took an afternoon off
and went hunting, not alone as formerly he had
done, but with as large a party as he could gather.
They would drive out into the sand hills and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">mesas</hi> twenty
or thirty miles from town, where
the native quail and rabbits were still abundant
as automobiles had just begun to invade their
haunts. When they found a covey of quail the
sport would be fast and furious, with half a
dozen guns going at once and birds rising and
falling in all directions. Ramon keenly enjoyed
the hot excitement and dramatic quality of this.</p>

<p>At night he was usually to be found at the
White Camel Pool Hall where the local sporting
element foregathered and made its plans for the
evening. Sometimes a party would be formed to
<q>go down the line,</q> as a visit to the red light
district was called. Sometimes the rowdy dance
halls of Old Town were invaded. On Saturday
nights the dance at the country club always drew
a considerable attendance. There was also a
<q>dancing class</q> conducted by an estimable and
needy spinster named Grimes, who held assembly
dances once in two weeks in a little hall which
had been built by the Woman&rsquo;s Club. This
event always drew a large and very mixed crowd,
including some of the <q>best people</q> and others
who were considered not so good. Usually two
<pb n="207"/><anchor id="Pg207"/>
or three different sets were represented at
these gatherings, each tending to keep to itself.
But there was also a tendency for the sets to overlap.
Thus a couple of very pretty German girls,
who were the daughters of a local saloon keeper,
always appeared accompanied by young men of
their own circle with whom they danced almost
exclusively at first. But young men of the first
families could not resist their charms, and they
soon were among the most popular girls on the
floor. This was deplored by the young women
of more secure social position, who were wont to
remark that the crowd was deteriorating frightfully.
Some of these same superior virgins
found it necessary for politeness to dance with
Joe Bartello, the son of an Italian saloon owner,
and a very handsome and nimble-footed youth.
In a word, this was a place of social hazard and
adventure, and that was more than half its charm.
It finally became so crowded that dancing was
almost impossible.</p>

<p>The back room at the White Camel, where
poker games were nightly in progress, also
afforded Ramon frequent diversion. He played
in the <q>big</q> game now, where the stakes and limits
were high, and was one of the most daring and
dangerous of its patrons. He had more money
back of him than most of the men who played
there, and he also had more courage. If he
<pb n="208"/><anchor id="Pg208"/>
started a bluff he carried it through to the end,
which was always bitter for some one. He had
been known to stand pat on a pair and scare
every one else out of the game by the resolute
confidence of his betting. His plunges, of course,
sometimes cost him heavily, but for a long time
he was a moderate winner. His limitations as a
poker player were finally demonstrated to him
by one Fitzhugh Chesterman, a man with one
lung.</p>

<p>Chesterman was about twenty-six years old and
had come from Richmond, Virginia, about two
years before, with most of one lung gone and the
other rapidly going. He was a tall, thin blond
youth with the sensitive, handsome face which
so often marks the rare survivor of the old southern
aristocracy. He was totally lacking in the
traditional southern sentimentality. His eye had
a cold twinkle of courage that even the imminent
prospect of death could not quench, and his thin
shapely lips nearly always wore a smile slightly
twisted by irony. He established himself at the
state university, which had almost a hundred
students and boasted a dormitory where living was
very cheap. Chesterman sat before this dormitory
twelve to fourteen hours a day, even in
relatively cold weather. He made a living by
coaching students in mathematics and Greek.
He never raised his voice, he seldom laughed, he
<pb n="209"/><anchor id="Pg209"/>
never lost his temper. With his unwavering
ironical smile, as though he appreciated the keen
humour of taking so much trouble over such an insignificant
thing as a human life, he husbanded
his energy and fought for health. He took all
the treatments the local sanatoria afforded, but
he avoided carefully all the colonies and other
gatherings of the tubercular. When his lung
began to heal, as it did after about a year, and
his strength to increase, he enlarged his earnings
by playing poker. He won for the simple reason
that he took no more chances than he had to.
He systematically capitalized every bit of recklessness,
stupidity and desperation in his opponents.</p>

<p>When Ramon first encountered him, the game
soon simmered down to a struggle between the
two. Never were the qualities of two races more
strikingly contrasted. Ramon bluffed and
plunged. Chesterman was caution itself, playing
out antes in niggardly fashion until he had a hand
which put the law of probabilities strongly on his
side. Ramon was full of daring, intuition, imagination,
bidding always for the favour of the fates,
throwing logic to the winds. He was not above
moving his seat or putting on his hat to change his
luck. Chesterman smiled at these things. He
was cold courage battling for a purpose and praying
to no deities but Cause and Effect. Ramon
<pb n="210"/><anchor id="Pg210"/>
thought he was playing for money, but he was
really playing for the sake of his own emotions,
revelling alike in hope and despair, triumph and
victory, flushed and bright-eyed. Chesterman
stifled every emotion, discounted every hope, said
as little as possible, never relaxed his faint twisted
smile.</p>

<p>Ramon made some spectacular winnings, but
Chesterman wore him down as surely as a slow
hound wears down a deer despite its astounding
bursts of speed. Ramon was sure to lose in the
long run because he was always piling up odds
against himself by the long chances he took, while
his bluffs seldom deceived his cool and courageous
opponent. The finish came at one o&rsquo;clock in the
morning. Chesterman was pale with exhaustion,
but otherwise unchanged. Ramon was hoarse
and flushed, chewing a cigar to bits. He held a
full house and determined to back it to the limit.
Chesterman met him, bet for bet, raising every
time. Ramon knew that he must be beaten. He
knew that Chesterman would not raise him unless
he had a very strong hand. But he was beaten
anyway. At the bottom of his consciousness, he
knew that he had met a better man. He wanted
to end the contest on this hand. When Chesterman
showed four kings, Ramon fell back in his
chair, weak and disgusted. The other players,
most of whom had long been out of the game,
<pb n="211"/><anchor id="Pg211"/>
got up and said good night one by one. Only
the two were left, Ramon plunged in gloomy
reaction, Chesterman coolly counting his money,
putting it away.</p>

<p><q>I seem to have made quite a killing,</q> he remarked,
<q>how much did you lose?</q></p>

<p><q>O, I don&rsquo;t know &hellip; about five hundred.
Hell, what&rsquo;s five hundred to me &hellip; I don&rsquo;t
give a damn &hellip; I&rsquo;m rich.&hellip;</q></p>

<p>Chesterman glanced at him keenly.</p>

<p><q>Well,</q> he remarked, <q>I&rsquo;m glad you feel that
way about it, because I sure need the money.</q></p>

<p>He got up and walked away with the short
careful steps of a man who cherishes every ounce
of his energy.</p>

<p>Ramon was disgusted with himself. Chesterman
had made him feel like a weakling and a
child. He had thought himself a lion in this
game, and he had found out that he was an easily-shorn
lamb. He could not afford to lose five
hundred dollars either. He was not really a rich
man. He went home feeling deeply depressed
and discouraged. Vaguely he realized that in
Chesterman he had encountered the spirit which
he felt against him everywhere&mdash;a cool, calculating,
unmerciful spirit of single purpose, against
which the play and flow of his emotional and
imaginative nature was as ineffectual as mercury
against the point of a knife.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC30" type="chapter">
<pb n="212"/><anchor id="Pg212"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER XXX</hi>
</head>

<p>Within the next few days Ramon was sharply
reminded that he lived in a little town where news
travels fast and nobody&rsquo;s business is exclusively
his own. Cortez came into his office and accepted
a seat and a cigar with that respectful but worried
manner which always indicated that he had something
to say.</p>

<p><q>I hear you lost five hundred dollars the other
night,</q> he observed gravely, watching his young
employer&rsquo;s face.</p>

<p><q>Well, what of it?</q> Ramon enquired, a bit
testily.</p>

<p><q>You can&rsquo;t afford it,</q> Cortez replied. <q>And
not only the money &hellip; you&rsquo;ve got to think of
your reputation. You know how these gringos
are. They keep things quiet. They expect a
young man to lead a quiet life and tend to business.
It&rsquo;s all right to have a little fun &hellip; they
all do it &hellip; but for God&rsquo;s sake be careful.
You hurt your chances this way &hellip; in the law,
in politics.</q></p>

<p>Ramon jerked his head impatiently and flushed
a little, but reflection checked his irritation.
Hatred of restraint, love of personal liberty, the
<pb n="213"/><anchor id="Pg213"/>
animal courage that scorns to calculate consequences
were his by heritage. But he knew that
Cortez spoke the truth.</p>

<p><q>All right Antonio,</q> he said with dignity.
<q>I&rsquo;ll be careful.</q></p>

<p>The next day he got a letter which emphasized
the value of his henchman&rsquo;s warning and made
Ramon really thoughtful. It was from MacDougall,
and made him another offer for his land.
It had a preamble to the effect that land values
were falling, money was <q>tight,</q> and therefore
Ramon would do well to sell now, before a further
drop in prices. It made him an offer of ten
thousand dollars less than MacDougall had offered
before.</p>

<p>Ramon knew that the talk about falling values
was largely bluff, that MacDougall had heard of
his losses and of his loose and idle life, and
thought that he could now buy the lands at his
own price. The gringo had confidently waited
for the Mexican to make a fool of himself.
Ramon resolved hotly that he would do no such
thing. He had no idea of selling. He would be
more careful with his money, and next summer he
would go back to Arriba County, renew his campaign
against MacDougall and buy some land with
the money he could get for timber and wool.
He replied very curtly to MacDougall that his
lands were not for sale.</p>
<pb n="214"/><anchor id="Pg214"/>

<p>After that he stayed away from poker games
for a while. This was made easier by a new
interest which had entered his life in the person of
a waitress at the Eldorado Lunch room. The
girls at this lunch room had long borne a bad
reputation. Even in the days before the big hotel
had been built, when the railroad company maintained
merely a little red frame building there,
known as the Eating House, these waitresses had
been a mainstay of local bachelordom. Their
successors were still referred to by their natural
enemies, the respectable ladies of the town, as
<q>those awful eating house girls</q>; while the advent
of a new <q>hash-slinger</q> was always a matter of
considerable interest among the unmarried exquisites
who fore-gathered at the White Camel.
In this way Ramon quickly heard of the new
waitress. She was reputed to be both prettier
and less approachable than most of her kind.
Sidney Felberg had made a preliminary reconnaissance
and a pessimistic report.</p>

<p><q>Nothing doing,</q> he said. <q>She&rsquo;s got a husband
somewhere and a notion she&rsquo;s cut out for
better things.&hellip; I&rsquo;m off her!</q></p>

<p>This immediately provoked Ramon&rsquo;s interest.
He went to the lunch room at a time when he
knew there would be few customers. When he
saw the girl he felt a faint thrill. The reason for
this was that Dora McArdle somewhat resembled
<pb n="215"/><anchor id="Pg215"/>
Julia. The resemblance was slight and superficial,
yet instantly noticeable. She was a little larger,
but had about the same figure, and the same
colour of hair, and above all the same sensuous,
provocative mouth. Ramon followed her with
his eyes until she became conscious of his scrutiny,
when she tossed her head with that elaborate affectation
of queenly scorn, which seems to be the
special talent of waitresses everywhere. Nevertheless,
when she came to take his order she gave
him a pleasant smile. He saw now that she was
not really like Julia. She was coarse and commonplace,
but she was also shapely, ripe-breasted,
good-natured, full of the appeal of a healthy
animalism.</p>

<p><q>What time do you get done here?</q> Ramon
enquired.</p>

<p><q>Don&rsquo;t know that it&rsquo;s any of your business,</q>
she replied with another one of her crushing tosses
of the head, and went away to get his order.
When she came back he asked again.</p>

<p><q>What time did you say?</q></p>

<p><q>Well, about nine o&rsquo;clock, if it&rsquo;ll give you any
pleasure to know.</q></p>

<p><q>I&rsquo;ll come for you in my car,</q> he told her.</p>

<p><q>Oh! will you?</q> and she paid no more attention
to him until he started to go, when she gave
him a broad smile, showing a couple of gold teeth.</p>

<p>At nine o&rsquo;clock he was waiting for her at the
<pb n="216"/><anchor id="Pg216"/>
door, and she went with him. He took her for
a drive on the <hi rend="font-style: italic">mesa</hi>,
heading for the only road
house which the vicinity boasted. It was a great
stone house, which had been built long ago by a
rich man, and had later fallen into the hands of an
Italian named Salvini, who installed a bar, and
had both private dining rooms and bed rooms,
these latter available only to patrons in whom he
had the utmost confidence. This resort was informally
known as the <q>chicken ranch.</q></p>

<p>When Ramon tried to take his fair partner
there, on the plea that they must have a bite to
eat, she objected.</p>

<p><q>I don&rsquo;t believe that place is respectable,</q> she
told him very primly. <q>I don&rsquo;t think you ought
to ask me to go there.</q></p>

<p><q>O Hell!</q> said Ramon to himself. But aloud
he proposed that they should drive to an adjacent
hill-top from which the lights of the town could
be seen. When he had parked the car on this
vantage point and lit a cigarette, Dora began a
narrative of a kind with which he was thoroughly
familiar. She was of that well-known type of
woman who is found in a dubious position, but explains
that she has known better days. Her
father had been a judge in Kansas, the family had
been wealthy, she had never known what work
was until she got married, her marriage had been a
tragedy, her husband had drank, there had been a
<pb n="217"/><anchor id="Pg217"/>
smash-up, the family had met with reverses. On
and on went the story, its very tone and character
and the grammar she used testifying eloquently to
the fact that she was no such crushed violet as
she claimed to be. Ramon was bored. A year
ago he would have been more tolerant, but now he
had experienced feminine charm of a really high
order, and all the vulgarity and hypocrisy of this
woman was apparent to him. And yet as he sat
beside her he was keenly, almost morbidly conscious
of the physical attraction of her fine young
body. For all her commonness and coarseness,
he wanted her with a peculiarly urgent desire.
Here was the heat of love without the flame and
light, desire with no more exaltation than accompanies
a good appetite for dinner. He was
puzzled and a little disgusted.&hellip; He did not
understand that this was his defeated love, seeking,
as such a love almost inevitably does, a vicarious
satisfaction.</p>

<p>Repugnance and desire struggled strangely
within him. He was half-minded to take her
home and leave her alone. At any rate he was
not going to sit there and listen to her insane babble
all night. To put his fortunes to the test, he
abruptly took her in his arms. She made a futile
pretence of resistance. When their lips touched,
desire flashed up in him strongly, banishing all his
hesitations. He talked hot foolishness to which
<pb n="218"/><anchor id="Pg218"/>
she listened greedily, but when he tried to take
her to Salvini&rsquo;s again, she insisted on going home.
Before he left her he had made another appointment.</p>

<p>Now began an absurd contest between the two
in which Ramon was always man&oelig;uvring to get
her alone somewhere so that he might complete
his conquest if possible, while her sole object was
to have him gratify her vanity by appearing in
public with her. This he knew he could not
afford to do. He could not even drive down the
street with her in daylight without all gossips
being soon aware he had done so. No one knew
much about her, of course, but she was <q>one of
those eating house girls</q> and to treat her as a
social equal was to court social ostracism. He
would win the enmity of the respectable women
of the town, and he knew very well that respectable
women rule their husbands. His prospects
in business and politics, already suffering, would
be further damaged.</p>

<p>Here again was a struggle within him. He
was of a breed that follows instinct without fear,
that has little capacity for enduring restraints.
And he knew well that the other young lawyers,
the gringos, were no more moral than he. But
they were careful. Night was their friend and
they were banded together in a league of obscene
secrecy. He despised this code and yet he feared
<pb n="219"/><anchor id="Pg219"/>
it. For the gringos held the whip; he must
either cringe or suffer.</p>

<p>So he was careful and made compromises.
Dora wanted him to take her to dinner in the
main dining room of the hotel, and he evaded and
compromised by taking her there late at night
when not many people were present. She wanted
him to take her to a movie and he pleaded that he
had already seen the bill, and asked her if she
wanted to bore him. And when she pouted he
made her a present of a pair of silk stockings.
She accepted all sorts of presents, so that he felt
he was making progress. She was making vague
promises now of <q>sometime</q> and <q>maybe,</q> and
his desire was whipped up with anticipation, making
him always more reckless.</p>

<p>One night late he took her to the Eldorado
and persuaded her to drink champagne, thinking
this would forward his purpose. The wine made
her rosy and pretty, and it also made her forget
her poses and affectations. She was more charming
to him than ever before, partly because of the
change in her, and partly because his own critical
faculties were blunted by alcohol. He was almost
in love with her and he felt sure that he was
about to win her. But presently she began
wheedling him in the old vein. She wanted him
to take her to the dance at the Woman&rsquo;s Club!</p>

<p>This would be to slap convention in the face,
<pb n="220"/><anchor id="Pg220"/>
and at first he refused to consider it. But he
foolishly went on drinking, and the more he drank
the more feasible the thing appeared. Dora had
quit drinking and was pleading with him.</p>

<p><q>I dare you!</q> she told him. <q>You&rsquo;re afraid.&hellip;
You don&rsquo;t think I&rsquo;m good enough for you.&hellip;
And yet you say you love me.&hellip; I&rsquo;m just as good
as any girl in this town.&hellip; Well if you won&rsquo;t,
I&rsquo;m going home. I&rsquo;m through! I thought you
really cared.</q></p>

<p>And then, when he had persuaded her not to
run away, she became sad and just a little tearful.</p>

<p><q>It&rsquo;s terrible,</q> she confided. <q>Just because I
have to make my own living.&hellip;
<corr sic="Its"><anchor id="E13"/><ref target="e13">It&rsquo;s</ref></corr>
not fair. I
ought never to speak to you again.&hellip; And yet, I
do care for you.&hellip;</q></p>

<p>Ramon was touched. The pathos of her situation
appealed strongly to his tipsy consciousness.
Why not do it? After all, the girl was respectable.
As she said, nobody <q>had anything on
her.</q> The dance was a public affair. Any one
could go. He had been too timid. Not three
people there knew who she was. By God, he
would do it!</p>

<p>At first they did not attract much attention.
Dora was pretty and fairly well dressed, in no way
conspicuous. They danced exclusively with each
other, as did some other couples present, and
nothing was thought of that.</p>
<pb n="221"/><anchor id="Pg221"/>

<p>But soon he became aware of glances, hostile,
disapproving. Probably it was true that only a
few of the men at first knew who Dora was, but
they told other men, and some of the men told the
women. Soon it was known to all that he had
brought <q>one of those awful eating house girls</q>
to the dance! The enormity of the mistake he
had made was borne in upon him gradually.
Some of the men he knew smiled at him, generally
with an eye-brow raised, or with a shake of the
head. Sidney Felberg, who was a real friend,
took him aside.</p>

<p><q>For the love of God, Ramon, what did you
bring that Flusey here for? You&rsquo;re queering
yourself at a mile a minute. And you&rsquo;re drunk,
too. For Heaven&rsquo;s sake, cart her away while
the going&rsquo;s good!</q></p>

<p>Ramon had not realized how drunk he was
until he heard this warning.</p>

<p><q>O, go to hell, Sid!</q> he countered. <q>She&rsquo;s as
good as anybody &hellip; I guess I can bring anybody
I want here.&hellip;</q></p>

<p>Sidney shook his head.</p>

<p><q>No use, no use,</q> he observed philosophically.
<q>But it&rsquo;s too bad!</q></p>

<p>Ramon&rsquo;s own words sounded hollow to him.
He was in that peculiar condition when a man
knows that he is making an ass of himself, and
knows that he is going right ahead doing it. He
<pb n="222"/><anchor id="Pg222"/>
was more attentive to Dora than ever. He
brought her a glass of water, talked to her continually
with his back to the hostile room. He was
fully capable of carrying the thing through, even
though girls he had known all his life were refusing
to meet his eyes.</p>

<p>It was Dora who weakened. She became
quiet and sad, and looked infinitely forlorn.
When a couple of women got up and moved
pointedly away from her vicinity, her lip began
to tremble, and her wide blue eyes were brimming.</p>

<p><q>Come on, take me away quick,</q> she said pathetically.
<q>I&rsquo;m going to cry.</q></p>

<p>When they were in the car again she turned in
the seat, buried her face in her arms and sobbed
passionately with a gulping noise and spasmodic
upheavals of her shoulders. Ramon drove
slowly. He was sober now, painfully sober!
He was utterly disgusted with himself, and bitterly
sorry for Dora. A strong bond of sympathy
had suddenly been created between them,
for he too had tasted the bitterness of prejudice.
For the first time Dora was not merely a frumpy
woman who had provoked in him a desire he half-despised;
she was a fellow human, who knew the
same miseries.&hellip; He had intended to take her
this night, to make a great play for success, but
he no longer felt that way. He drove to the
boarding house where she lived.</p>
<pb n="223"/><anchor id="Pg223"/>

<p><q>Here you are,</q> he said gently, <q>I&rsquo;ll call you
up tomorrow.</q></p>

<p>Dora looked up for the first time.</p>

<p><q>O, no!</q> she plead. <q>Don&rsquo;t go off and leave
me now. Don&rsquo;t leave me alone. Take me somewhere,
anywhere.&hellip; Do anything you want
with me.&hellip; You&rsquo;re all I&rsquo;ve got!</q></p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC31" type="chapter">
<pb n="224"/><anchor id="Pg224"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER XXXI</hi>
</head>

<p>The rest of the winter Ramon spent in an aimlessly
pleasant way. He tried to work but without
arousing in himself enough enthusiasm to insure
success. He played pool, gambled a little
and hunted a great deal. He relished his pleasures
with the keen appetite of health and youth,
but when they were over he felt empty-minded
and restless and did not know what to do about it.</p>

<p>Some business came to his law office. Because
of his knowledge of Spanish and of the country
he was several times employed to look up titles to
land, and this line of work he might have developed
into a good practice had he possessed the
patience. But it was monotonous, tedious work,
and it bored him. He would toil over the papers
with a good will for a while, and then a state of
apathy would come over him, and like a boy in
school he would sit vaguely dreaming.&hellip; Such
dull tasks took no hold upon his mind.</p>

<p>He defended several Mexican criminals, and
found this a more congenial form of practice, but
an unremunerative one. The only case which
advanced him toward the reputation for which
every young attorney strives brought him no
<pb n="225"/><anchor id="Pg225"/>
money at all. A young Mexican farmer of good
reputation named Juan Valera had been converted
to the Methodist faith. Like most of the few
Mexicans who are won over to Protestantism, he
had brought to his new religion a fanatical spirit,
and had made enemies of the priests and of many
of his neighbours by proselyting. Furthermore,
his young and pretty wife remained a Catholic,
which had caused a good deal of trouble in his
house. But the couple were really devoted and
managed to compromise their differences until a
child was born. Then arose the question as to
whether it should be baptized a Catholic or a
Methodist. The girl wanted her baby to be
baptized in the Catholic faith, and was fully
persuaded by the priests that it would otherwise
go to purgatory. She was backed by her father,
whose interference was resented by Juan more
than anything else. He consulted the pastor of
his church, a bigoted New Englander, who counselled
him on no account to yield.</p>

<p>One evening when Juan was away from home,
his father-in-law came to his house and persuaded
the girl to go with him and have the child baptized
in the Catholic faith, in order that it might be
saved from damnation. After the ceremony they
went to a picture-show by way of a celebration.
When Juan came home he learned from the neighbours
what had happened. His face became very
<pb n="226"/><anchor id="Pg226"/>
pale, his lips set, and his eyes had a hot, dangerous
look. He got out a butcher knife from the
kitchen, whetted it to a good point, and went and
hid behind a big cottonwood tree near the moving-picture
theatre. When his wife with the child
and her father came out, he stepped up behind
the old man and drove the knife into the back of
his neck to the hilt, severing the spinal column.
Afterward he looked at the dead man for a moment
and at his wife, sitting on the ground shrieking,
then went home and washed his hands and
changed his shirt&mdash;for blood had spurted all over
him&mdash;walked to the police station and gave himself
up.</p>

<p>This man had no money, and it is customary
in such cases for the court to appoint a lawyer to
conduct the defence. Usually a young lawyer who
needs a chance to show his abilities is chosen, and
the honor now fell upon Ramon.</p>

<p>This was the first time since he had begun to
study law that he had been really interested. He
understood just how Juan Valera had felt. He
called on him in jail. Juan Valera was composed,
almost apathetic. He said he was willing to die,
that he did not fear death.</p>

<p><q>Let them hang me,</q> he said. <q>I would do
the same thing again.</q></p>

<p>Ramon studied the law of his case with exhaustive
thoroughness, but the law did not hold out
<pb n="227"/><anchor id="Pg227"/>
much hope for his client. It was in his plea to
the jury that he made his best effort. Here again
he discovered the eloquence that he had used the
summer before in Arriba County. Here he lost
for a moment his sense of aimlessness, felt again
the thrill of power and the joy of struggle. He
described vividly the poor Mexican&rsquo;s simple faith,
his absolute devotion to it, showed that he had
killed out of an all-compelling sense of right and
duty. He found a good many witnesses to testify
that Juan&rsquo;s father-in-law had hectored the
young man a good deal, insulted him, intruded in
his home. Half of the jurors were Mexicans.
For a while the jury was hung. But it finally
brought in a verdict of murder in the first degree,
which was practically inevitable. Juan accepted
this with a shrug of his shoulders and announced
himself ready to hang and meet his Methodist
God. But Ramon insisted on taking an appeal.
He finally got the sentence commuted to life
imprisonment. He then felt disgusted, and
wished that he had let the man hang, feeling that
he would have been better off dead than in the
state penitentiary. But Juan&rsquo;s wife, who really
loved him, came to Ramon&rsquo;s office and embraced
his knees and laughed and cried and swore that
she would do his washing for nothing as long as
she lived. For now she could visit her husband
once a month and take him <hi rend="font-style: italic">tortillas!</hi> Ramon
<pb n="228"/><anchor id="Pg228"/>
gave her ten dollars and pushed her out the door.
He had worked hard on the case. He felt old
and weary and wanted to get drunk.</p>

<p><milestone unit="tb"/></p>

<p>One day Ramon received an invitation to go
hunting with Joe Cassi and his friends. He
accepted it, and afterward went on many trips
with the Italian saloon-owner, thereby doing
further injury to his social standing.</p>

<p>Cassi had come to the town some twenty years
before with a hand organ and a monkey. The
town was not accustomed to that form of entertainment;
some of the Mexicans threw rocks
at Cassi and a dog killed his monkey. Cassi was
at that time a slender youth, handsome, ragged
and full of high hopes. When his monkey was
killed he first wept with rage and then swore that
he would stay in that town and have the best of it.
He now owned three saloons and the largest
business building in town. He was a lean, grave,
silent little man.</p>

<p>Cassi had made most of his money in the days
when gambling was <q>open</q> in the town, and he
had surrounded himself with a band of choice
spirits who were experts in keno, roulette and
poker. These still remained on his hands, some
of them in the capacity of barkeepers, and others
practically as pensioners. They were all great
sportsmen, heavy drinkers and loyal-to-the-death
<pb n="229"/><anchor id="Pg229"/>
friends. At short intervals they went on hunting
trips down the river, generally remaining over
the week-end. It was of these expeditions that
Ramon now became a regular member. Sometimes
the whole party would get drunk and come
back whooping and singing as the automobiles
bowled along, occasionally firing shotguns into the
air. At other times when luck was good everyone
became interested in the sport and forgot to
drink. Ramon had a real respect for Cassi, and
a certain amount of contempt for most of the rest
of them; yet he felt more at home with these
easy-going, pleasure-loving, loyal fellows than he
did with those thrifty, respectable citizens in whose
esteem the dollar stood so invariably first.</p>

<p>Cassi and his friends used most often to go to
a Mexican village some fifty miles down the river
where the valley was low and flat, and speckled
with shallow alkaline ponds made by seepage
from the river. Every evening the wild ducks
flew into these ponds from the river to feed, and
the shooting at this evening flight Ramon especially
loved. The party would scatter out, each
man choosing his own place on the East side of
one of the little lakes, so that the red glare of the
sunset was opposite him. There he would lie
flat on the ground, perhaps making a low blind of
weeds or rushes.</p>

<p>Seldom even in January was it cold enough to
<pb n="230"/><anchor id="Pg230"/>
be uncomfortable. Ramon would lie on an
elbow, smoking a cigarette, watching the light
fade, and the lagoon before him turn into molten
gold to match the sunset sky. It would be very
quiet save for such sounds as the faraway barking
of dogs or the lowing of cattle. When the sky
overhead had faded to an obscure purple, and the
flare of the sunset had narrowed to a belt along
the horizon, he would hear the distant eerie
whistle of wild wings. Nothing could be seen
yet, but the sound multiplied. He could distinguish
now the roar of a great flock of mallards,
circling round and round high overhead, scouting
for danger. He could hear the sweet flute-notes
of teal and pintails, and the raucous, cautious
quack of some old green-head. A teal would
pitch suddenly down to the water before him and
rest there, erect and wary, painted in black upon
the golden water. Another would join it and
another. The cautious mallards, encouraged by
this, would swing lower. The music of their
wings seemed incredibly close; he would grip his
gun hard, holding himself rigidly still, feeling
clearly each beat of his heart.</p>

<p>Suddenly the ducks would come into view &hellip; dark
forms with ghostly blurs for wings, shooting
with a roar into the red flare of light. The flash
of his shotgun would leap out twice. The startled
birds would bound into the air like blasted
<pb n="231"/><anchor id="Pg231"/>
rock from a quarry, and be lost in the purple
mystery of sky, except two or three that hurtled
over and over and struck the water, each with a
loud spat, throwing up little jets of gold.</p>

<p>Sometimes there were long waits between shots,
but at others the flight was almost continuous, the
air seemed full of darting birds, and the gun
barrels were hot in his hands. His excitement
would be intense for a time; yet after he had
killed a dozen birds or so he would often lose
interest and lie on his back listening to the music
of wings and of bird voices. He had that aversion
to excess which seems to be in all Latin
peoples. Besides, he did not want many ducks to
dispose of.&hellip; It was the rush and colour, the
dramatic quality of the thing that he loved.</p>

<p>Most of the others killed to the limit with a
fine unflagging lust for blood, giving a brilliant
demonstration of the fact that civilized man is
the most destructive and bloodthirsty of all the
predatory mammals.</p>

<p><milestone unit="tb"/></p>

<p>The coming of spring was marked by a few
heavy rains, followed by the faint greening of the
cottonwood trees and of the alfalfa fields. The
grey waste of the <hi rend="font-style: italic">mesa</hi>
showed a greenish tinge,
too, heralding its brief springtime splendor when
it would be rich with the purple of wild-peas,
pricked out in the morning with white blossoms
<pb n="232"/><anchor id="Pg232"/>
of the prairie primrose. Now and then a great
flock of geese went over the town, following the
Rio Grande northward half a mile high, their
faint wild call seeming the very voice of this
season of lust and wandering.</p>

<p>Ramon felt restless and lost interest in all his
usual occupations. He began to make plans and
preparations for going to the mountains. He
bought a tent and a new rifle and overhauled all
his camping gear. He thought he was getting
ready for a season of hard work, but in reality
his strongest motive was the springtime longing
for the road and the out-of-doors. He was sick
of whisky and women and hot rooms full of
tobacco smoke.</p>

<p>Withal it was necessary that he should go to
Arriba County, follow up his campaign of the
preceding fall, arrange a timber sale if possible
so that he might buy land, and above all see that
his sheep herds were properly tended. This was
the crucial season in the sheep business. Like
the other sheep owners, he ranged his herds
chiefly over the public domain, and he gambled on
the weather. If the rain continued into the early
summer so that the waterholes were filled and
the grass was abundant, he would have a good
lamb crop. The sale of part of this and of the
wool he would shear would make up the bulk of
his income for the year. And he had already
<pb n="233"/><anchor id="Pg233"/>
spent that income and a little more. He could
not afford a bad year. If it was a dry spring,
so that lambs and ewes died, he would be seriously
embarrassed. In any case, he was determined to
be on the range in person and not to trust the
herders. If it came to the worst and the spring
was dry he would rent mountain range from the
Forest Service and rush his herds to the upland
pastures as early as possible. He was not at all
distressed or worried; he knew what he was about
and had an appetite for the work.</p>

<p>One morning when he was in the midst of his
preparations, he went to his office and found on
the desk a small square letter addressed in a
round, upright, hand. This letter affected him
as though it had been some blossom that filled the
room with a fragrant narcotic exhalation. It
quickened the beat of his heart like a drug. It
drove thought of everything else out of his mind.
He opened it and the faint perfume of it flowed
over him and possessed his senses and his
imagination.&hellip;</p>

<p>It was a long, gossipy letter and told him of
nearly everything that Julia had done in the six
months since they had parted <q>forever</q>. The
salient fact was that she had been married. A
young man in a New York brokerage office who
had long been a suitor for her hand, and to whom
she had once before been engaged for part of a
<pb n="234"/><anchor id="Pg234"/>
summer, had followed the Roths to Europe and
he and Julia had been married immediately after
their return.</p>

<p><q>I give you my word, I don&rsquo;t know why I did
it,</q> she wrote. <q rend="post: none">Mother wanted me to, and I
just sort of drifted into it. First thing I knew I
was engaged and the next thing mother was sending
the invitations out, and then I was in for it.
It was a good deal of fun being engaged, but
when it came to being married I was scared to
death and couldn&rsquo;t lift my voice above a whisper.
Since then it has been rather a bore. Now my
husband has been called to London. I am living
alone here in this hotel. That is, more or less
alone. A frightful lot of people come around
and bore me, and I have to go out a good deal.
I&rsquo;m supposed to be looking for an apartment, too;
but I haven&rsquo;t really started yet. Ralph won&rsquo;t
be back for another two or three weeks, so I
have plenty of time.</q></p>

<p><q>I don&rsquo;t know why in the world I&rsquo;m writing
you this long frightfully intimate letter. I don&rsquo;t
seem to know why I do anything these days. I
know its most improper for a respectable married
lady, and I certainly have no reason to suppose
you want to be bothered by me any more after the
way I did. But somehow you stick in the back
of my head. You might write me a line, just out
of compassion, if you&rsquo;re not too busy with all
<pb n="235"/><anchor id="Pg235"/>
your sheep and mountains and things.</q> She
signed herself <q>as ever</q>, which, he reflected bitterly,
might mean anything.</p>

<p>At first the fact that she was married wholly
engaged his attention. She was then finally and
forever beyond his reach. This was the end sure
enough. He was not going to start any long
aimless correspondence with her to keep alive the
memory of his disappointment. He planned
various brief and chilly notes of congratulation.&hellip;
Then another thought took precedence
over that one. She was alone there in that hotel.
Her husband was in London. She had written to
him and given him her address.&hellip; His blood
pounded and his breath came quick. He made
his decision instantly, on impulse. He would go
to New York.</p>

<p>He wired the hotel where she was stopping for
a reservation, but sent no word at all to her. He
gave the bewildered and troubled Cortez brief
orders by telephone to go to Arriba County in his
place, arranged a note at the bank for two thousand
dollars, and caught the limited the same
night at seven-thirty-five.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC32" type="chapter">
<pb n="236"/><anchor id="Pg236"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER XXXII</hi>
</head>

<p>He looked at New York through a taxicab
window without much interest. A large damp
grey dirty place, very crowded, where he would
not like to live, he thought. He managed himself
and his baggage with ease and dispatch; his
indifferent, dignified manner and his reckless use
of money were ideally effective with porters, taxi
drivers and the like. When he reached the hotel
about eight o&rsquo;clock at night he went to his room
and made himself carefully immaculate. He
studied himself with a good deal of interest in the
full length mirror which was set in the bath room
door; for he had seldom encountered such a mirror
and he had a considerable amount of vanity of
which he was not at all conscious. It struck him
that he was remarkably good-looking, and indeed
he was more so than usual, his eyes bright, his
face flushed, his whole body tense and poised with
purpose and expectation.</p>

<p>He went down to the lobby, looked Julia up in
the register, ascertained the number of her room,
and made a note of it. Then he asked the telephone
girl to call her and learn whether she
was in.</p>
<pb n="237"/><anchor id="Pg237"/>

<p><q>Yes; she is in. She wants to know who&rsquo;s
calling, please.</q></p>

<p><q>Tell her an old friend who wants to surprise
her.</q> He did not care to risk any evasion, and
he also wanted his arrival to have its full dramatic
effect.</p>

<p>The telephone girl transmitted his message.</p>

<p><q>She says she can&rsquo;t come down yet &hellip; not
for about half an hour.</q></p>

<p><q>Tell her I&rsquo;ll wait. If she asks for me I&rsquo;ll be
in that little room there.</q> He pointed to a
small reception room opening off the mezzanine
gallery, which he had selected in advance. He
had planned everything carefully.</p>

<p><milestone unit="tb"/></p>

<p>When he stood up to meet her she gave a little
gasp, and took a step back.</p>

<p><q>Why, you! Ramon! How could you?
You shouldn&rsquo;t have come. You know you
shouldn&rsquo;t. I didn&rsquo;t mean that &hellip; I had no
idea.&hellip;</q></p>

<p>He came forward and took her hand and led
her to a settee. Despite all her protests he could
see very plainly that he had scored heavily in his
own favour. She was flustered with excitement
and pleasure. Like all women, she was captivated
by sudden, decisive action and loved the
surprising and the dramatic.</p>

<p>They sat side by side, looking at each other,
<pb n="238"/><anchor id="Pg238"/>
smiling, making unimportant remarks, and then
looking at each other again. Ramon felt that
she had changed. She was as pretty as ever, and
never had she stirred him more strongly. But her
appeal seemed more immediate than before; she
seemed less remote. The innocence of her wide
eyes was a little less noticeable and their flash of
recklessness a little more so. It seemed to him
that her mouth was larger, which may have been
due to the fact that she had rouged it a little too
much. She wore a pink decollete with straps over
the shoulders one of which kept slipping down
and had to be pulled up again.</p>

<p>Ramon was tremulous with a half-acknowledged
anticipation, but he held himself strongly in hand.
He felt that he had an advantage over her&mdash;that
he was more at ease and she less so than at
any previous meeting&mdash;and he meant to keep it.</p>

<p>But she was rapidly regaining her composure,
and took refuge in a rather formal manner.</p>

<p><q>Are you going to be here long?</q> she enquired
in the conventional tone of mock-interest.</p>

<p><q>Just a week or so on business,</q> he explained,
determined not to be outpointed in the game. <q>I
had to come some time this spring, and when I got
your note I thought I would come while you are
here.</q></p>

<p><q>But I&rsquo;ll be here the rest of my life probably.
This is where I live. You ought to have come
<pb n="239"/><anchor id="Pg239"/>
when my husband was here. I&rsquo;d like to have you
meet him. As it is, I can&rsquo;t see much of you, of
course.&hellip;</q></p>

<p>He refused to be put out by this coldness, but
tried to strike a more intimate note.</p>

<p><q>Tell me about your marriage,</q> he asked.
<q>Are you really happy?&hellip; Do you like it?</q></p>

<p>She looked at the floor gravely.</p>

<p><q>You shouldn&rsquo;t ask that, of course,</q> she reproved.
<q>Everyone who has just been married
is very, very happy.&hellip; No, I don&rsquo;t like it a
darn bit.</q></p>

<p><q>It&rsquo;s not what you expected, then.</q></p>

<p><q>I don&rsquo;t know what I expected, but from the
way people talk about it and write about it you
would certainly think it was something wonderful&mdash;love
and passion and bliss and all that, I mean.
I feel that I&rsquo;ve either been lied to or cheated &hellip;
of course<corr sic=""><anchor id="E9"/><ref target="e9">,</ref></corr></q>
she added with a little side glance at
him, <q>I didn&rsquo;t exactly love my husband.&hellip;</q>
She blushed and looked down again; then laughed
softly and rather joyfully for a lady with a broken
heart.</p>

<p><q>If mother could only hear me now!</q> she
observed.&hellip; <q>She&rsquo;d faint. I don&rsquo;t care.&hellip;
That&rsquo;s just the way I feel.&hellip; I don&rsquo;t care!
All my life I&rsquo;ve been trained and groomed and
prepared for the grand and glorious event of
marriage. I&rsquo;ve been taught it&rsquo;s the most wonderful
<pb n="240"/><anchor id="Pg240"/>
thing that can happen to anyone. That&rsquo;s what
all the books say, and all the people I know.
And here it turns out to be a most uncomfortable
bore.&hellip;</q></p>

<p>He looked gravely sympathetic.</p>

<p><q>Do you think it would have been different
with&mdash;someone you did love?</q> he enquired
cautiously.</p>

<p>She gave him another quick thrilling glance.</p>

<p><q>I don&rsquo;t know,</q> she said.&hellip; <q>Maybe &hellip;
I felt so different about you.</q></p>

<p>Their hands met on the settee and they both
moved instinctively a little closer together.</p>

<p>Suddenly she jerked away from him, looking
him in the eyes with her head thrown back and
a smile of irony on her lips.</p>

<p><q>Aren&rsquo;t we a couple of idiots?</q> she demanded.</p>

<p><q>No!</q> he declared with fierce emphasis, and
throwing an arm about her, pounced on her lips.</p>

<p>Just then a bell boy passed the door. They
jerked apart and upright very self-consciously.
Then they looked at each other and laughed. But
their eyes quickly became deep and serious again,
and their fingers entangled.</p>

<p>She sighed in mock exasperation.</p>

<p><q rend="pre: none"><corr sic=""><anchor id="E10"/>
<ref target="e10">&ldquo;</ref></corr>For Heaven&rsquo;s
sake, say something!</q> she
demanded. <q>We can&rsquo;t sit here and make eyes at
each other all evening. Besides I&rsquo;m compromising
my priceless reputation. It&rsquo;s after ten o&rsquo;clock.
<pb n="241"/><anchor id="Pg241"/>
I&rsquo;ve got to go.</q> She rose, and held out her hand,
which he took without saying anything.</p>

<p><q>Good night,</q> she said. <q>I think you were
mean to come and camp on me this way &hellip; dumb
as ever, I see &hellip; well, good night.</q></p>

<p>She went to the door, stopped and looked back,
smiled and disappeared.</p>

<p>Ramon went down to the lobby and roamed
all over the two floors which constituted the public
part of the hotel. He looked at everything and
smoked a great many cigarettes, thus restlessly
whiling away an hour. Then he went to a writing
room. He collected some telegrams and letters
about him and appeared to be very busy. When
a bell boy went by, he rapped sharply on the desk
with a fifty-cent piece, and as the boy stopped,
tossed it to him.</p>

<p><q>Get me the key to 207!</q> he ordered sharply;
then turned back to his imaginary business.</p>

<p><q>Yes sir,</q> said the boy. He returned in a few
minutes with the key.</p>

<p>Ramon sat for a long moment looking at it,
tremulous with a great anticipation. He was
divided between a conviction that she expected
him and a fear that she did not.&hellip; His fear
proved groundless.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC33" type="chapter">
<pb n="242"/><anchor id="Pg242"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER XXXIII</hi>
</head>

<p>The next day they met for dinner at a little
place near Washington Square where it was certain
that none of Julia&rsquo;s friends ever went. Julia
was a singularly contented-looking criminal.
Never, Ramon thought had her skin looked more
velvety, her eyes deeper or more serene. He
was a trifle haggard, but happy, and both of them
were hungry.</p>

<p><q>Do you know?&hellip; I&rsquo;ve made a discovery,</q>
she told him. <q>I haven&rsquo;t any conscience. I slept
peacefully nearly all day, and when I waked up I
considered the matter carefully &hellip; I don&rsquo;t
believe that I have any proper appreciation of the
enormity of what I&rsquo;ve done at all. I have always
thought that if anything like this ever happened
to me I would go off and chloroform myself, but
as a matter of fact I have no such intention &hellip; of
course, though, it was not my fault in the least.
You&rsquo;re so terrible!&hellip; I simply couldn&rsquo;t help
myself, and I don&rsquo;t see what I can do now &hellip; that&rsquo;s
comforting. But one thing is certain.
We&rsquo;ve got to be awfully careful. Thank Heaven,
mother and Gordon are still in Florida and they
won&rsquo;t dare to come North on Gordon&rsquo;s account
<pb n="243"/><anchor id="Pg243"/>
until it gets a good deal warmer. But we must
be careful. I&rsquo;m not sorry, like I should be, but
I sure am scared.&hellip;</q></p>

<p>They sat for a long time after the meal, Ramon
smoking a cigar, their knees touching under the
table. He was filled with a vast contentment.
He thought nothing of the troubled past, nor did
he look into the obviously troubled future. He
merely basked in the consciousness of a possession
infinitely sweet.</p>

<p>Now began for them a life of clandestine
adventure. Julia had a good many engagements,
but she managed to give him some part of every
day. They never met in the hotel, but usually
took taxicabs separately and met in out-of-the-way
parts of that great free wilderness of city.
Ramon spent most of the time when he was not
with her exploring for suitable meeting places.
They became patrons of cellar restaurants in
Greenwich Village, of French and Italian places
far down town, of obscure Brooklyn hotels. If
the regular fare at these establishments was not
all they desired, Ramon would lavishly bribe the
head waiter, call the proprietor into consultation
if necessary, insist on getting what Julia wanted.
He spent his money like a millionaire, and usually
created the general impression that he was a
wealthy foreigner. Every morning he had
flowers sent to Julia&rsquo;s room. Often they would
<pb n="244"/><anchor id="Pg244"/>
take a taxi and spend hours riding about the
streets with the blinds drawn, locked in each
others&rsquo; arms.</p>

<p>For a week they were keenly, excitedly happy,
living wholly in the joy of the moment. Then a
flaw appeared upon the glowing perfect surface
of their happiness.</p>

<p><q>When is your husband coming back?</q> he
enquired once, when they were riding through
Central Park.</p>

<p><q>I don&rsquo;t know. In a week or two. Why?</q></p>

<p><q>Because we must decide pretty soon what we&rsquo;re
going to do.</q></p>

<p><q>Do? What can we do?</q></p>

<p><q>We must decide where we&rsquo;re going. You
must go with me somewhere. I&rsquo;m not going to
let you get away from me again &hellip; not even
for a little while.</q></p>

<p><q>But Ramon, how can we? I&rsquo;m married. I
can&rsquo;t go anywhere with you.&hellip;</q></p>

<p>He seized her fiercely by the shoulders and
held her away from him, looking into her eyes.</p>

<p><q>Don&rsquo;t you love me, then?</q> he demanded.</p>

<p><q>Ramon! You know I do!</q></p>

<p><q>Then you&rsquo;ll go. We can go to Mexico City, or
South America &hellip; I&rsquo;ll sell out at home.&hellip;</q></p>

<p><q>O, Ramon &hellip; I can&rsquo;t. I haven&rsquo;t got the
courage. Think of the fuss it would raise. And
it would kill Gordon, I know it would.&hellip;</q></p>
<pb n="245"/><anchor id="Pg245"/>

<p><q>Damn Gordon!</q> he exclaimed, <q>he&rsquo;s not going
to get in the way again! You&rsquo;re mine and I&rsquo;m
going to keep you. You will go. I&rsquo;ll take you!</q></p>

<p>He had seized her in his arms, was holding her
furiously tight. She put her arms around him,
caressed his face with soft fluttering hands.</p>

<p><q>Please, Ramon! Please don&rsquo;t make me
miserable. Don&rsquo;t spoil the only happiness I ever
had! I will go with you if ever I can, if I can get
a divorce or something. But I can&rsquo;t run off like
that. I haven&rsquo;t got it in me &hellip; please let me
be happy!</q></p>

<p>Her touch and her voice seemed to overcome
his determination, seemed to sheer him of his
strength. Weaker she was than he, but her charm
was her power. It dragged him away from his
thoughts and purposes, binding him to her and to
the moment.&hellip; She drew his head down to her
breast, found his lips with hers and so effectively
cut his protests short.</p>

<p><milestone unit="tb"/></p>

<p>The cream of his happiness was gone.
Always when he was alone, he was thinking and
planning how he could keep her. All of his
possessiveness was aroused. He wanted her to
have a baby. Somehow he felt that then his conquest
would be complete, that then he would be
at peace.&hellip;</p>

<p>He said nothing more to Julia because he saw
<pb n="246"/><anchor id="Pg246"/>
that it was useless. He began to understand her
a little. It was futile to ask her to make a decision,
to take any initiative. She could hold out
forever against pleas which involved an effort of
the will on her part. And yet as he knew she
could yield charmingly to pressure adroitly
applied. If he had asked her to meet him in New
York this way, he reflected, she would have been
horrified, she would never have consented. But
when he came, suddenly, that had been different.
So it was now. If he could only form a really
good plan, and then put her in a cab and take her &hellip; that
would be the only way. The difficulty
was to form the plan. He had capacity for
sudden and decisive action. He lacked neither
courage nor resolution. But when it came to
making a plan which would require much time and
patience, he found his limitations.</p>

<p>What could he do? he asked himself, not realizing
that in formulating the question he acknowledged
his impotence. If he went away and left
her while he settled his affairs, she was lost as
surely as a bird released from a cage. The idea
of Mexico City allured him. But he had hardly
enough money to take them there. How could he
raise money on short notice? It would take time
to settle his estate in New Mexico and get anything
out of it.&hellip;</p>

<p>Two unrealized facts lay at the root of his
<pb n="247"/><anchor id="Pg247"/>
difficulty. One was that he had no capacity for
large and intricate plans, and the other was that
he felt bound as by an invisible tether to the land
where he had been born.</p>

<p>As he struggled with all these conflicting considerations
and emotions, his head fairly ached with
futile effort. He was glad to lay it upon Julia&rsquo;s
soft bosom, to forget everything else again in the
sweetness of a stolen moment.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC34" type="chapter">
<pb n="248"/><anchor id="Pg248"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER XXXIV</hi>
</head>

<p>He had been in New York about ten days when
he awoke one morning near noon. An immense
languor possessed him. He had been with Julia
the night before and never had she been more
charming, more abandoned.&hellip; He ordered his
breakfast to be sent up, and then stretched out in
bed and lit an expensive Russian cigarette. He
had that love of sensuous indolence, which,
together with its usual complement, the capacity
for brief but violent action, marked him as a
primitive man&mdash;one whom the regular labors and
restraints of civilization would never fit.</p>

<p>His telephone bell rang, and when he took
down the receiver he heard Julia&rsquo;s voice. It was
not unusual for her to call him about this time,
but what she told him now caused a blank and
hapless look to come over his face. She was not
in her room, but in another hotel.</p>

<p><q>My husband got in this morning,</q> she explained
in a voice that was thin with misery and
confusion. <q>I got his message last night, but I
didn&rsquo;t tell you because I knew it would spoil our
last time together, and I was afraid you would do
something foolish.&hellip; Please say you&rsquo;re not
<pb n="249"/><anchor id="Pg249"/>
angry. You know there was nothing for it. We
couldn&rsquo;t have done any of those wild things you
talked about. I&rsquo;ll always love you, honestly I
will. Won&rsquo;t you even say goodby?&hellip;</q></p>

<p>He at last did say goodby and hung up the
receiver and went across the room and sat in an
armchair. It suddenly struck him that he was
very tired. He had not realized it before &hellip; how
tired he was. There was none of the mad
rebellion in him now that had filled him when first
she had run away from him. Although he had
never acknowledged it to himself he had been
more than half prepared for this. He had told
himself that he was going to do something bold
and decisive, but he had procrastinated; he had
never really formed a plan.</p>

<p>Weariness was his leading emotion. He was
spent, physically and emotionally. He wanted
her almost as much as ever. While she was no
longer the remote and dazzling star she had been,
the bond of flesh that had been created between
them seemed a stronger, a more constant thing
than blinding unsatisfied desire. But a great
despair possessed him. There was so obviously
nothing he could do. Just as his other disappointment
had given him his first stinging impression of
the irony of life, that cunningly builds a hope and
then smashes it; so now he felt for the first time
something of the helplessness of man in the
<pb n="250"/><anchor id="Pg250"/>
current or his destiny, driven by deep-laid desires
he seldom understands, and ruled by chances he
can never calculate. From love a man learns
life in quick and painful flashes.</p>

<p>Through the open window came the din of the
New York street&mdash;purr and throb of innumerable
engines, rumble and clatter of iron wheels, tapping
of thousands of restless feet, making a blended
current of sound upon which floated and tossed the
shrillness of police whistles and newsboys&rsquo; voices
and auto horns. It had been the background of
his life during memorable days. Once it had
stirred his pulses, seeming a wild accompaniment
to the song of his passion. Now it wearied him
inexpressibly; it seemed to be hammering in his
ears; he wanted to get away from it. He would
go home that day.</p>

<p><milestone unit="tb"/></p>

<p>As always on his trips across the continent he
sat apathetically smoking through the wide green
lushness of the middle west. Only when the
cultivated lands gave way to barren hills and
faint blue mountains peeping over far horizons
did he turn to the window and forget his misery
and his weariness. How it spoke to his heart,
this country of his own! He who loved no man,
who had gone to women with desire and come
away with bitterness, loved a vast and barren
land, baking in the sun. The sight of it quickened
<pb n="251"/><anchor id="Pg251"/>
his pulses, softened and soothed his spirit. Like
a good liquor it nursed and beautified whatever
mood was in him. When he had come back to it
a year before, it had spoken to him of hope, its
mysterious distances had seemed full of promise
and hidden possibility. And now that he came
back to it with hopes broken, weary in mind and
body, it seemed the very voice of rest. He
thought of long cool nights in the mountains and
of the lullaby that wind and water sing, of the
soothing monotony of empty sunlit levels, of the
cool caress of deep, green pools, of the sweet
satisfaction that goes with physical weariness and
a full belly and a bed upon the ground.</p>

<p>But when on the last morning of his journey he
waked up within a hundred miles of home, and
less than half that far from his own mountain
lands, his new-found comfort quickly changed to
a keen anxiety. For he saw at a glance that the
country was under the blight of drought. The
hills that should have borne a good crop of
gramma grass at this time of the year, if the rains
had been even fair, were nothing but bare red
earth from which the rocks and the great roots of
the <hi rend="font-style: italic">pinion</hi>
trees stood out like the bones of a
starving animal. Here and there on the hillsides
he could see a scrubby pine that had died, its
needles turned rust-red&mdash;the sure sign of a serious
drought.</p>
<pb n="252"/><anchor id="Pg252"/>

<p>During the half month that he had been gone
he had thought not once of his affairs at home.
The moment had absorbed him completely. Now
it all came back to him suddenly. When he had
left, the promise of the season had been good.
It had not rained for more than a week, but everyone
had been expecting rain every day. It was
clear to him that the needed rain had never come.
And he knew just what that meant to him. It
meant that he had lost lambs and ewes, that he
would have no money this year with which to
meet his notes at the bank. He sank deep in
despair and disgust again. Not only was the
assault on his fortunes a serious one, but he felt
little inclined to meet it. He was weary of struggle.
He saw before him a long slow fight to get
on his feet again, with the chance of ultimate
failure if he had another bad year.</p>

<p>The Mexicans firmly believe, in the face of
much evidence to the contrary, that seven wet
years are always followed by seven dry ones. He
had heard the saying gravely repeated many
times. He more than half believed it. And he
knew that for a good many years, perhaps as
many as six or seven, the rains had been remarkably
good. He was intelligent, but superstition
was bred in his bones. Like all men of a primitive
type he had a strong tendency to believe in
<pb n="253"/><anchor id="Pg253"/>
fortune as a deliberate force in the affairs of men.
It seemed clear to him now, in his depressed and
exhausted condition, that bad luck had marked
him for its prey.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC35" type="chapter">
<pb n="254"/><anchor id="Pg254"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER XXXV</hi>
</head>

<p>His forebodings were confirmed in detail the
next morning when Cortez came into his office,
his face wrinkled with worry and darkened by
exposure to the weather. He was angry too.</p>

<p><q><hi rend="font-style: italic">Por Dios</hi>,
man! To go off like that and not
even leave me an address. If I could have gotten
more money to hire men I might have saved some
of them &hellip; yes, more than half of the lambs
died, and many of the ewes. There is nothing
to do now. They are on the best of the range,
and it has begun to rain in the mountains. But
it is too bad. It cost you many thousands &hellip; that
trip to New York.</q></p>

<p>Ramon gave Cortez a cigar to soothe his
sensibilities, thanked him with dignity for his loyal
services, and sent him away. Then he put on
his hat and went outside to walk and think.</p>

<p>The town seemed to him quiet as though half-deserted.
This was partly by contrast with the
place of din which he had just left, and partly
because this was the dull season, when the first
hot spell of summer drove many away from the
town and kept those who remained in their houses
most of the day. The sandy streets caught the
<pb n="255"/><anchor id="Pg255"/>
sun and cherished it in a merciless glare. They
were baked so hot that barefoot urchins hopped
gingerly from one patch of shade to the next.
In the numerous vacant lots rank jungles of weeds
languished in the dry heat, and long blue-tailed
lizards, veritable heat-sprites, emerged to frolic
and doze on deserted sidewalks. The leaves of
the cottonwoods hung limp, and the white downy
tufts that carried their seeds everywhere drifted
and swam in the shimmering air. The river had
shrunk to a string of shallow pools in a sandy
plain, the irrigation ditches were empty, and in
Old Town the Mexicans were asking God for
rain by carrying an image of the Virgin Mary
about on a litter and firing muskets into the air.</p>

<p>Quickly wearied, Ramon sat down on a shaded
bench in the park and tried to think out his situation
and to decide what he should do. The easy
way was to sell out, pay his debts, provide for his
mother and sister and with what was left go his
own way&mdash;buy a little ranch perhaps in the mountains
or in the valley where he could live in peace
and do as he pleased. Wearied as he was by
struggle and disappointment, this prospect allured
him, and yet he could not quite accept it. He
felt vaguely the fact that in selling his lands, he
would be selling out to fate, he would be surrendering
to MacDougall, to the gringos, he would
be renouncing all his high hopes and dreams.
<pb n="256"/><anchor id="Pg256"/>
His mountain lands, with their steadily increasing
value, the power they gave him, would make of
his life a thing of possibilities&mdash;an adventure.
Settled on a little ranch somewhere, his whole
story would be told in one of its years.</p>

<p>This he did not reason clearly, but the emotional
struggle within him was therefore all the
stronger. It was his old struggle in another
guise&mdash;the struggle between the primitive being
in him and the civilized, between earth and the
world of men. Each of them in turn filled his
mind with images and emotions, and he was impotent
to judge between them.</p>

<p>His being was fairly rooted in the soil, and the
animal happiness it offered&mdash;the free play of
instinct, the sweetness of being physically and
emotionally at peace with environment&mdash;was the
only happiness he had ever known. Vaguely yet
surely he had felt the world of men and works,
the artificial world, to contain something larger
and more beautiful than this. Julia Roth had
been to him a stimulating symbol of this higher,
this more desirable thing. His love for her had
been the soil in which his aspirations had grown.
That love had turned to bitterness and lust,
and his aspirations had led him among greeds and
fears and struggles that differed from those of
the wild things only in that they were covert and
<pb n="257"/><anchor id="Pg257"/>
devious, lacking the free beauty of instinct fearlessly
followed and the dignity of open battle.
Of civilization he had encountered only the raw
and ugly edge, which is uglier than savagery. He
knew no more of the true spirit of it than a man
who has camped in a farmer&rsquo;s back pasture knows
of the true spirit of wildness. It had treated
him without mercy and brought out the worst of
him. And yet because he had once loved and
dreamed he could not go back to the easy but
limited satisfactions of the soil and be wholly
content.</p>

<p>So he could not make up his mind at first to
surrender, but in the next few days one thing
after another came to tempt him that way. MacDougall
made him an offer for his lands which
to his surprise was a little better than the last one.
He learned afterward that the over-shrewd
lawyer had misinterpreted his trip to New York,
imagining that he had gone there to interest
eastern capital in his lands.</p>

<p>His mother and sister were two very cogent
arguments in favour of selling. The Dona
Delcasar, a simple and vain old lady, now
regarded herself as a woman of wealth, and was
always after him for money. Her ambition was
to build a house in the Highlands and serve tea
at four o&rsquo;clock (although it was thick chocolate
<pb n="258"/><anchor id="Pg258"/>
she liked) and break into society. His one
discussion of the matter with her was a bitter
experience.</p>

<p><q>Holy Mary!</q> she exclaimed in her shrill
Spanish, when he broached a plan of retrenchment,
<q>What a son I have! You spend thousands
on yourself, chasing women and buying automobiles,
and now you want us to spend the rest of
our lives in this old house and walk to church so
that you can make it up. God, but men are
selfish!</q></p>

<p>He saw that if he tried to save money and
make a fight for his lands he would have to
struggle not only with MacDougall and the
weather, but with two ignorant, ambitious and
sharp-tongued women. And family pride here
fought against him. He did not want to see
his women folk go shabbily in the town. He
wanted them to have their brick house and their
tea parties, and to uphold the name of Delcasar
as well as they might.</p>

<p>One day while he was still struggling with his
problem he went to look at a ranch that was
offered for sale in the valley a few miles north of
town. It was this place more than anything else
which decided him. The old house had been
built by one of his ancestors almost a hundred
years before, and had then been the seat of an
estate which embraced all the valley and
<hi rend="font-style: italic">mesa</hi>
<pb n="259"/><anchor id="Pg259"/>
lands for miles in every direction. It had changed
hands several times and there were now but a
few hundred acres. The woodwork of the house
was in bad repair, but its adobe walls, three feet
thick, were firm as ever. There were still traces
of the adobe stockade behind it, with walls ten
feet high, and the building which had housed the
<hi rend="font-style: italic">peones</hi>
was still standing, now filled with fragrant
hay. In front of it stood an old cedar post with
rusty iron rings to which the recalcitrant field
hands had been bound for beating.</p>

<p>Every detail of this home of his forefathers
stirred his emotions. The ancient cottonwood
trees in front of the house with their deep,
welcome shade and the soft voices of courting
doves among the leaves; the alfalfa fields heavy
with purple blossom, ripe for cutting; the orchard
of old apple trees and thickets of Indian plum
run wild; the neglected vineyard that could be
made to yield several barrels of red wine&mdash;all
of these things spoke to him with subtle voices.
To trade his heritage for this was to trade hope
and hazard for monotonous ease; but with the
smell of the yielding earth in his nostrils, he no
more thought of this than a man in love thinks of
the long restraints and irks of marriage when the
kiss of his woman is on his lips.</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: always" id="BC36" type="chapter">
<pb n="260"/><anchor id="Pg260"/>
<index index="toc"/>
<index index="pdf"/>
<head rend="text-align: center">
  <hi rend="font-size: 125%">CHAPTER XXXVI</hi>
</head>

<p>Ramon&rsquo;s life on his farm quickly fell into a
routine that was for the most part pleasant. He
hired an old woman to do his cooking and washing,
and a man to work on the place. Other
men he hired as he needed them, and he spent
most of his days working with them as a foreman.</p>

<p>He attended to the business of farming ably.
The trees of the old orchard he pruned and
sprayed and he set out new ones. He put his
idle land under irrigation and planted it in corn
and alfalfa. He set out beds of strawberries
and asparagus. He bought blooded livestock
and chickens. He put his fences in repair and
painted the woodwork of his house. The creative
energy that was in him had at last found an
outlet which was congenial though somewhat
picayune. For the place was small and easily
handled. As the fall came on, and his crops had
been gathered and the work of irrigation was
over for the season, he found himself looking
about restlessly for something to do. On Saturday
nights he generally went to town, had
dinner with his mother and sister, and spent the
evening drinking beer and playing pool. But he
<pb n="261"/><anchor id="Pg261"/>
felt increasingly out of place in the town; his
visits there were prompted more by filial duty
and the need of something to break the monotony
of his week than by a real sense of pleasure in
them.</p>

<p>He was still caring for Catalina on the ranch
up the valley, and when the woman who had been
doing his work left him, he decided to bring the
girl to his place and let her earn her keep by
cooking and washing. He no longer felt any
interest in her, and thought that perhaps she
would marry Juan Cardenas, the man who milked
his cows and chopped wood for him. But
Catalina showed no interest in Juan. Instead,
she emphatically rejected all his advances, and
displayed an abject, squaw-like devotion to
Ramon&rsquo;s welfare. Everything possible was done
for his comfort without his asking. The infant,
now almost a year old, was trained not to cry in
his presence, and acquired a certain awe of him,
watching him with large solemn eyes whenever
he was about. Ramon, reflecting that this was
his son, set out to make the baby&rsquo;s acquaintance,
and became quite fond of it. He often played
with it in the evening.</p>

<p>He paid Catalina regular wages and she spent
most of the money on clothes. When she
prepared herself for Church on Sunday she was
a truly terrible spectacle, clad in an ill-fitting
<pb n="262"/><anchor id="Pg262"/>
ready-made suit of brilliant colour, and wearing
a cheap hat on which a dead parrot sprawled
among artificial poppies, while her swarthy face,
heavily powdered, took on a purple tinge. But
about the place, dressed in clean calico, with a
shawl over her shoulders, she was really pretty.
Her figure was a good one of peasant type, and
the acquisition of some shoes which fitted her
revealed the fact that she had inherited from
her remote Castilian ancestry a small and shapely
foot and ankle.</p>

<p>Ramon could not help noticing all of these
things, and so gradually he became aware of
Catalina again as a desirable woman, and one
whom it was easy for him to take.</p>

<p>After this his animal contentment was deeper
than ever. He did not go to town so often, for
one of the restlessnesses which had driven him
there was removed. Often for weeks at a
stretch he would not go at all unless it was necessary
to get some tools or supplies for the farm.
Then rather than take any of his men away from
work, he would himself hitch up a team and drive
the five miles. Sitting hunched over on the
spring-seat of a big farm wagon, clad in overalls
and a print shirt, with a wide hat tilted against
the sun and a cigarette dangling from his lips, he
was indistinguishable from any other
<hi rend="font-style: italic">paisano</hi> on
the road. This change in appearance was helped
<pb n="263"/><anchor id="Pg263"/>
by the fact that he had grown a heavy moustache.
Often, as he drove through the streets of the
town, he would pass acquaintances who did not
recognize him, and he was just as well satisfied
that they did not.</p>

<p>As is the way of unreflecting men, Ramon
formed no definite opinion of his life, but liked
it more or less according to the mood that was in
him. There were bright, cool days that fall
when, lacking work to do, he took his shot-gun
and a saddle horse and went for long rambles.
Sometimes he would follow the river northward,
stalking the flocks of teal and mallards that dozed
on the sandbars in the wide, muddy stream,
perhaps killing three or four fat birds. Other
times he went to the foot of the mountains and
hunted the blue quail and cotton tail rabbits in
the arroyos of the foot-hills. Once he and his
man loaded a wagon with food and blankets and
drove forty miles to a canyon where they killed a
big black-tail buck, and brought him back in high
triumph.</p>

<p>Returning from such trips full of healthy
hunger and weariness, to find his hot supper and
his woman waiting for him, Ramon would doze
off happily, every want of his physical being satisfied,
feeling that life was good.&hellip; But there
were other nights when a strange restlessness
possessed him, when he lay miserably awake
<pb n="264"/><anchor id="Pg264"/>
through long dark hours. The silence of the
black valley was emphasized now and then by the
doleful voices of dogs that answered each other
across the sleeping miles. At such times he felt
as though he had been caught in a trap. He saw
in imagination the endless unvaried chain of his
days stretching before him, and he rebelled against
it and knew not how to break it. His experience
of life was comparatively little and he was no
philosopher. He did not know definitely either
what was the matter with him or what he wanted.
But he had tasted high aspiration, and desire
bright and transforming, and wild sweet joy.&hellip;
These things had been taken away, and now life
narrowed steadily before him like a blind canyon
that pierces a mountain range. The trail at the
bottom was easy enough to follow, but the walls
drew ever closer and became more impassable,
and what was the end?&hellip;</p>

<p><milestone unit="tb"/></p>

<p>This sense of dissatisfaction reached its futile
crux one day in the spring when he received a
letter from Julia&mdash;the last he was ever to get.
The sight and scent of it stirred him as they
always had done, filling him with poignant painful
memories.</p>

<p><q>This is really the last time I&rsquo;ll ever bother
you,</q> she wrote, <q rend="post: none">but I do want to know what has
happened to you, and how you feel about things.
<pb n="265"/><anchor id="Pg265"/>
I can&rsquo;t forget. All our troubles seem to have
worn some sort of a permanent groove in my poor
brain, and I believe the thought of you will be
there till the day of my death.
</q></p>

<p><q rend="post: none">As, for me, I&rsquo;m in society up to my eyes, and
absolutely without the courage or energy to climb
out. Those days in New York were the first and
the last of my freedom. Now I&rsquo;ve been introduced
to everybody, and I have an engagement
book that tells me what I&rsquo;m going to do whether
I want to or not for three weeks ahead. I&rsquo;m a
model of conduct and propriety for the simple
reason that I can&rsquo;t travel over a block without
everybody that I know finding out about it.
</q></p>

<p><q>Of course it hasn&rsquo;t all been a bore. I have
had some fun, and I&rsquo;ve met some really interesting
people. I&rsquo;ve gotten used to being married and
my husband treats me kindly and gives me a good
home. Sounds as if I was a kitten, doesn&rsquo;t it?
Well, I have very much the same sort of life as a
kitten, but a kitten has no imagination and it has
never been in love. Sometimes I think that I
can&rsquo;t stand it any longer. It seems to me that
I&rsquo;m not really living, as I used to imagine I would,
but just being dragged through life by circumstances
and other people&mdash;I don&rsquo;t know what all.
I still have desperate plans and ideas once in a
while, but of course, I never do anything. When
you come right down to it, what can I do?</q></p>
<pb n="266"/><anchor id="Pg266"/>

<p>Ramon read this letter sitting on the sunny
side of his house with his heels under him and
his back against the wall&mdash;a position any Mexican
can hold for hours. When he had finished it he
sat motionless for a long time, painfully going
over the past, trying ineptly to discover what had
been the matter with it. More acutely than ever
before he felt the cruel guerdon of youth&mdash;the
contrast between the promise of life and its fulfillment.
He felt that he ought to do something,
that he ought not to submit. But somehow all
the doors that led out of his present narrow way
into wider fields seemed closed. There was no
longer any entrancing vista to tempt him. Mentally
he repeated her query, What could he do?</p>

<p>His thoughts went round and round and got
nowhere. The spring sunshine soaked into his
body. A faint hum of early insects lulled him,
and to his nostrils came the scent of new-turned
earth and manure from the garden where his man
was working. He grew drowsy; his dissatisfaction
simmered down to a vague ache in the background
of his consciousness. Idly he tore the
letter to little bits.</p>

<milestone unit="tb"/>

<trailer rend="text-align: center; font-size: 75%">THE END</trailer>
</div>

</body>

<back>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right" type="extra pages">
    <index index="toc"/>
    <index index="pdf"/>
    <head rend="text-align: center">
      <hi rend="font-size: 125%">EXTRA PAGES</hi>
    </head>

    <div rend="page-break-before: right" type="extra pages">
      <pb n="1"/><anchor id="Pg1"/>
      <p rend="text-align: center; margin-left: 20">
      <hi rend="font-style: italic; font-size: 150%">The Blood of
      <lb/>the Conquerors</hi></p>
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always" type="extra pages">
      <pb n="2"/><anchor id="Pg2"/>
      <list rend="font-style: italic; font-size: 75%">
        <item><hi rend="margin-left: 2">NEW BORZOI NOVELS</hi></item>
        <item><hi rend="margin-left: 4">FALL, 1921</hi></item>
      </list>

      <list rend="font-size: 75%">
        <item><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Pan</hi></item>
        <item><hi rend="font-style: italic;
                        margin-left: 1">Knut Hamsun</hi></item>

        <item><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Dreamers</hi></item>
        <item><hi rend="font-style: italic;
                        margin-left: 1">Knut Hamsun</hi></item>

        <item><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">The Tortoise</hi></item>
        <item><hi rend="font-style: italic;
                        margin-left: 1">Mary Borden</hi></item>

        <item><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">The China Shop</hi></item>
        <item><hi rend="font-style: italic;
                        margin-left: 1">G. B. Stern</hi></item>

        <item><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">The Briary-Bush</hi></item>
        <item><hi rend="font-style: italic;
                        margin-left: 1">Floyd Dell</hi></item>

        <item><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">Deadlock</hi></item>
        <item><hi rend="font-style: italic;
                        margin-left: 1">Dorothy Richardson</hi></item>

        <item><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">The Other Magic</hi></item>
        <item><hi rend="font-style: italic;
                        margin-left: 1">E. L. Grant-Watson</hi></item>

        <item><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">White Shoulders</hi></item>
        <item><hi rend="font-style: italic;
                        margin-left: 1">George Kibbe Turner</hi></item>

        <item><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">The Charmed Circle</hi></item>
        <item><hi rend="font-style: italic;
                        margin-left: 1">Edward Alden Jewell</hi></item>

        <item><hi rend="font-variant: small-caps">The Blood of
                                                  the Conquerors</hi></item>
        <item><hi rend="font-style: italic; margin-left: 1">Harvey
          <corr sic="Furgusson"><anchor id="E11"/>
          <ref target="e11">Fergusson</ref></corr></hi></item>
      </list>
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: right" type="extra pages">
      <pb n="5"/><anchor id="Pg5"/>
      <p rend="text-align: center; margin-left: 20">
      <hi rend="font-style: italic; font-size: 150%">The Blood of
      <lb/>the Conquerors</hi></p>
    </div>
  </div>

  <div rend="page-break-before: right" type="errata">
    <index index="toc"/>
    <index index="pdf"/>
    <head rend="text-align: center">
      <hi rend="font-size: 125%">ERRATA</hi>
    </head>

    <list><anchor id='e1'/>
      <item>CHAPTER II</item>
      <item>Changed: they were <ref target="E1"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">untamable</hi></ref>,
        but boys</item>
      <item>To: they were <hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">untameable</hi>,
        but boys</item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e2'/>
      <item>CHAPTER II</item>
      <item>Changed: adventures were <ref target="E2"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">comoposed</hi></ref>
        and sung </item>
      <item>To: adventures were <hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">composed</hi>
        and sung </item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e3'/>
      <item>CHAPTER IV</item>
      <item>Changed: your name,&rdquo; she admitted<ref target="E3"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">,</hi></ref>
        </item>
      <item>To: your name,&rdquo; she admitted<hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">.</hi>
        </item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e4'/>
      <item>CHAPTER V</item>
      <item>Changed: only all-night <ref target="E4"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">resturant</hi></ref>.
        Here he </item>
      <item>To: only all-night <hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">restaurant</hi>.
        Here he </item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e5'/>
      <item>CHAPTER VII</item>
      <item>Changed: haunted by <ref target="E5"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold"></hi>lizzards</ref>
        and rattlesnakes.</item>
      <item>To: haunted by <hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">lizards</hi>
        and rattlesnakes.</item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e6'/>
      <item>CHAPTER VIII</item>
      <item>Changed: CHAPTER VIII<ref target="E6"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">.</hi></ref>
        </item>
      <item>To: CHAPTER VIII<hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">&nbsp;</hi>
        </item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e12'/>
      <item>CHAPTER XI</item>
      <item>Changed: the game<ref target="E12"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">,</hi></ref>
        But the</item>
      <item>To: the game<hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">.</hi>
        But the</item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e7'/>
      <item>CHAPTER XV</item>
      <item>Changed: nights they <ref target="E7"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">visted</hi></ref>
        the town&rsquo;s</item>
      <item>To: nights they <hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">visited</hi>
        the town&rsquo;s</item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e8'/>
      <item>CHAPTER XIX</item>
      <item>Changed: saved from <ref target="E8"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">furthur</hi></ref>
        punishment. Meantime,</item>
      <item>To: saved from <hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">further</hi>
        punishment. Meantime,</item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e13'/>
      <item>CHAPTER XXXI</item>
      <item>Changed: own living.&hellip; <ref target="E13"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">Its</hi></ref>
        not fair.</item>
      <item>To: own living.&hellip; <hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">It&rsquo;s</hi>
        not fair.</item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e9'/>
      <item>CHAPTER XXXII</item>
      <item>Changed: of course<ref target="E9"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">&thinsp;</hi></ref>&rdquo;
        she added</item>
      <item>To: of course<hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">,</hi>&rdquo;
        she added</item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e10'/>
      <item>CHAPTER XXXII</item>
      <item>Changed: <ref target="E10"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">&thinsp;</hi></ref>For
        Heaven&rsquo;s sake, say something!&rdquo;</item>
      <item>To: <hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">&ldquo;</hi>For
        Heaven&rsquo;s sake, say something!&rdquo;</item>
    </list>

    <list><anchor id='e11'/>
      <item>Page 2</item>
      <item>Changed: Harvey <ref target="E11"><hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">Furgusson</hi></ref>
        </item>
      <item>To: Harvey <hi
        rend="font-weight: bold">Fergusson</hi>
        </item>
    </list>
  </div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<divGen type="pgfooter"/>
</div>

</back>

    </text>
</TEI.2>
<!--
A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 20888-tei.tei or 20888-tei.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/0/8/8/20888/


Updated editions will replace the previous one &#8212; the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg&#8482; electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg&#8482; concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
&#8212; you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.


THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg&#8482; mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase &#8220;Project Gutenberg&#8221;),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg&#8482;
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg&#8482; electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg&#8482; electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg&#8482; electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg&#8482; electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


&#8220;Project Gutenberg&#8221; is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg&#8482; electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg&#8482; electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg&#8482; electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (&#8220;the Foundation&#8221; or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg&#8482; electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg&#8482; mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg&#8482; works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg&#8482; name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg&#8482; License when you
share it without charge with others.

This particular work is one of the few copyrighted individual works
included with the permission of the copyright holder. Information on the
copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use imposed by
the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the beginning of this
work.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg&#8482; work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg&#8482; License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg&#8482; work (any work on which the phrase
&#8220;Project Gutenberg&#8221; appears, or with which the phrase &#8220;Project Gutenberg&#8221;
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg&#8482; electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase &#8220;Project Gutenberg&#8221; associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg&#8482;
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg&#8482; electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg&#8482; License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg&#8482; License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg&#8482;.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg&#8482; License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg&#8482; work in a format other than
&#8220;Plain Vanilla ASCII&#8221; or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg&#8482; web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original &#8220;Plain Vanilla ASCII&#8221; or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg&#8482; License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg&#8482; works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg&#8482; electronic works provided that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg&#8482; works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg&#8482; trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      &#8220;Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation.&#8221;

    - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg&#8482; License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg&#8482; works.

    - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

    - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg&#8482; works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg&#8482; electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg&#8482; trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg&#8482; collection. Despite these
efforts, Project Gutenberg&#8482; electronic works, and the medium on which they
may be stored, may contain &#8220;Defects,&#8221; such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES &#8212; Except for the &#8220;Right of
Replacement or Refund&#8221; described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg&#8482;
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg&#8482;
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND &#8212; If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you &#8217;AS-IS,&#8217; WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY &#8212; You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg&#8482; electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg&#8482; electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg&#8482; work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg&#8482; work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg&#8482;


Project Gutenberg&#8482; is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg&#8482;&#8217;s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg&#8482; collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg&#8482; and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation&#8217;s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state&#8217;s laws.

The Foundation&#8217;s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation&#8217;s web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg&#8482; depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg&#8482; electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg&#8482;
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg&#8482;
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg&#8482; eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook&#8217;s eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg&#8482;, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
-->
